Skip to main content
 
TEXTS
 
VIDEO
 
AUDIO
 
SOFTWARE
IMAGES
 
All
Search the Archive. Filters and Advanced Search available below.

  SIGN UP | LOG IN
 UPLOAD
Sign up for free
Log in
ABOUT  BLOG  EVENTS  PROJECTS  HELP  DONATE  CONTACT  JOBS  VOLUNTEER
Full text of "Of Mice And Man And Canery And Row"
See other formats
Of Mice and Men is the story of the strong and the weak, and 
their dependence upon each other It re\ohes around two 
central characters Lennxe and George Lenme is a man with 
the strength of two, but with it the mind of a child - simple, 
unaffected and kindly He has a great love for animals and all 
soft helpless things, he likes to stroke the soft fur of a mouse and 
to feel a puppy’s silky ears His whole world centres round 
George, who steers him through life and protects him when his 
superhuman strength and child’s mmd unwittingly entangle 
him m trouble with people who do not realize that there is no 
wee m him George’s brusqueness and apparent lack of in- 
terest m Lenme co\er a real affection for him, and in the end 
George is called upon to help Lenme out of real trouble m a 
\ery tragic but courageous way 


Of Cannery Row John Steinbeck said he just ‘opened the 
pages and let the stories crawl m by themselves ’ Cannery 
Row is a street bordered by houses, shacks, and boiler pipes, 
in which live all kinds of people, good and bad, kind and cruel, 
the industrious and the idle, who have one thing at least m 
common - their poverty. There is Doc, who works in the bio- 
logical laboratory, and is respected and loved by his neigh- 
bours, there are Mack and the ‘boys’, who li\ e (with their be- 
loved puppy) in the house with the intriguing name of Palace 
Flophouse, and whose kindly actions always seem to go wrong, 
and there is Lee Chong, the enigmatical Chinaman who owns 
the general store, and has his work cut out to prevent himself 
from becoming the victim of a cunning barter. Cannery Row is 
the story, or chain of stories, of these assorted inhabitants of an 
unusual street 



PENGUIN BjOO£S 
717 

OF MICE AND MEN 
CANNERY ROW 

JOHN STEINBECK 




OF MICE AND MEN 

and 


CANNERY ROW 

by 

JOHN STEINBECK 


PENGUIN BOOKS 
IN ASSOCIATION WITH 


WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD 



*OF MICE AND MEN* FIRST PUBLISHED *937 

•cannery row* first published 1945 

FIRST PUBLISHED IN PENGUIN BOOKS 1 949 
REPRINTED I 95 I, *953 


MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 
FOR PENGUIN BOOKS LTD 
HARMONDSWORTH, MIDDLESEX 
BY SPOTTISWOODE BALLANTYNE AND CO. LTD 



Of Mice and Men 




OF MICE AND MEN 


A few miles south of Soledad, the Salinas River drops in 
close to the hill-side bank and runs deep and green. The 
water is warm too, for it has slipped twinkling over the yel- 
low sands in the sunlight before reaching the narrow pool. 
On one side of the river the golden foothill slopes curve up 
to the strong and rocky Gabilan mountains, but on the val- 
ley side the water is lined with trees - willows fresh and green 
with every spring, carrying in their lower leaf junctures the 
debris of the winter’s flooding; and sycamores with mottled, 
white, recumbent limbs and branches that arch over the 
pool. On the sandy bank under the trees the leaves lie deep 
and so crisp that a lizard makes a great skittering if he runs 
among them. Rabbits come out of the brush to sit on the 
sand in the evening, and the damp flats are covered with the 
night tracks of ’coons, and with the spread pads of dogs from 
the ranches, and with the split-wedge tracks of deer that 
come to drink in the dark. 

There is a path through the willows and among the syca- 
mores, a path beaten hard by boys coming down from the 
ranches to swim in the deep pool, and beaten hard by 
tramps who come wearily down from the highway in the 
evening to jungle-up near water. In front of the low hori- 
zontal limb of a giant sycamore there is an ash-pile made by 
many fires; the limb is worn smooth by men who have sat 
on it. 

* 

Evening of a hot day started the little wind to moving 
among the leaves. The shade climbed up the hills toward the 
top. On the sand-banks the rabbits sat as quietly as little 
grey, sculptured stones. And then from the direction of the 



8 Of Mice and Men 

state highway came the sound of footsteps on crisp sycamore 
leaves. The rabbits hurried noiselessly for cover. A stilted 
heron laboured up into the air and pounded down river. 
For a moment the place was lifeless, and then two men 
emerged from the path and came into the opening by the 
green pool. They had walked in single file down the path, 
and even m the open one stayed behind the other. Both were 
dressed in denim trousers and in denim coats with brass but- 
tons Both wore black, shapeless hats and both carried tight 
blanket rolls slung over their shoulders. The first man was 
small and quick, dark of face, with restless eyes and sharp, 
strong features. Every part of him was defined: small, 
strong hands, slender arms, a thin and bony nose. Behind 
him walked his opposite, a huge man, shapeless of face, with 
large, pale eyes, with wide, sloping shoulders; and he walked 
heavily, dragging his feet a little, the way a bear drags his 
paws. His arms did not swing at his sides, but hung loosely 
and only moved because the heavy hands were pendula. 

The first man stopped short in the clearing, and the fol- 
lower nearly ran over him. He took off his hat and wiped 
the sweat-band with his forefinger and snapped the moisture 
off. His huge compamon dropped his blankets and flung 
himself down and drank from the surface of the green pool; 
drank with long gulps, snorting into the water like a horse. 
The small man stepped nervously beside him. 

‘LennieP he said sharply. ‘Lennie, for God’s sakes don’t 
drink so much/ Lenme continued to snort into the pool. 
The small man leaned over and shook him by the shoulder. 
c Lennie. You gonna be sick like you was last night/ 

Lenme dipped his whole head under, hat and all, and 
then he sat up on the bank and his hat dripped down on his 
blue coat and ran down his back. ‘Tha’s good/ he said. ‘You 
drink some, George. You take a good big drink/ He smiled 
happily. 

George unslung his bundle and dropped it gently on the 



Of Mice and Men 9 

bank. *1 ain’t sure it’s good water/ he said. "Looks kinda 
scummy,’ 

Lennie dabbled his big paw in the water and wiggled Ms 
fingers so the water arose in little splashes; rings widened 
across the pool to the other side and came back again. Len- 
nie watched them go. "Look, George. Look what I done/ 

George knelt beside the pool and drank from his hand 
with quick scoops. "Tastes all right/ he admitted. "Don’t 
really seem to be running, though. You never oughta drink 
water when it ain’t running, Lennie,’ he said hopelessly. 
"You’d drink out of a gutter if you was thirsty.’ He threw a 
scoop of water into his face and rubbed it about with his 
hand, under his chin and around the back of his neck. Then 
he replaced his hat, pushed himself back from the river, 
drew up his knees and embraced them. Lennie, who had 
been watching, imitated George exactly. He pushed himself 
back, drew up his knees, embraced them, looked over to 
George to see whether he had it just right. He pulled his hat 
down a little more over his eyes, the way George’s hat was. 

George stared morosely at the water. The rims of his eyes 
were red with sun glare. He said angrily: "We could just as 
well of rode clear to the ranch if that bastard bus-dnver 
knew what he was talkin’ about. ‘"Jes’ a little stretch down 
the highway,” he says. ""Jes’ a little stretch.” God damn near 
four miles, that’s what it was! Didn’t wanta stop at the ranch 
gate, that’s what. Too God damn lazy to pull up. Wonder 
he isn’t too damn good to stop in Soledad at all. Kicks us 
out and says: ""Jes’ a little stretch down the road.” I bet it 
was more than four miles. Damn hot day.’ 

Lennie looked timidly over to him. "George?’ 

"Yeah, what ya want?’ 

"Where we goin’, George?’ 

The little man jerkeddownthebrimof his hat and scowled 
over at Lennie. "So you forgot that awready, did you? I gotta 
tell you again, do I? Jesus Christ, you’re a crazy bastard!* 



io Of Mice and Men 

‘I forgot/ Lennie said softly. T tried not to forget. Honest 
to God I did, George.’ 

‘O.K. — O.K. I’ll tell ya again. I ain’t got nothing to do. 
Might jus’ as well spen’ all my time tellin’ you things and 
then you forget ’em, and I tell you again.* 

‘Tried and tried/ said Lennie, ‘but it didn’t do no good. 
I remember about the rabbits, George.’ 

‘The hell with the rabbits. That’s all you ever can re- 
member is them rabbits. O.K.! Now you listen and this time 
you got to remember so we .don’t get in no trouble. You re- 
member settin’ in that gutter on Howard Street and watchin’ 
that blackboard?’ 

Lennie’s face broke into a delighted smile. ‘Why sure, 
George. I remember that ... but ... what’d we do then? I 
remember some girls come by and you says ... you says ...’ 

‘The hell with what I says. You remember about us goin’ 
into Murray and Ready’s, and they give us work cards and 
bus tickets?’ 

‘Oh, sure, George. I remember that now.’ His hands went 
quickly into his side coat pockets. He said gently: ‘George 
... I ain’t got mine. I musta lost it.’ He looked down at the 
ground in despair. 

‘You never had none, you crazy bastard. I got both of ’em 
here. Think I’d let you carry your own work card?’ 

Lennie grinned with relief. ‘I ... I thought I put it in my 
side pocket.’ His hand went into the pocket again. 

George looked sharply at him. ‘What’d you take outa that, 
pocket?’ 

‘Ain’t a thing in my pocket/ Lennie said cleverly. 

‘I know there ain’t. You got it in your hand. What you 
got in your hand - hidin’ it?’ 

‘I ain’t got nothin’, George. Honest.’ 

‘Gome on, give it here.’ 

Lennie held his closed hand away from George’s direction. 
«It’s on’y a mouse, George.* 



II 


Of Mice and Men 

‘A mouse? A live mouse?’ 

‘Uh-uh. Jus 3 a dead mouse, George. I didn* kill it. Honest! 
I found it. I found it dead.’ 

‘Give it here , 5 said George. 

‘Aw, leave me have it, George/ 

‘Give it here /’ 

Lennie’s closed hand slowly obeyed. George took the 
mouse and threw it across the pool to the other side, among 
the brush. ‘What you want of a dead mouse, anyways ? 5 

‘I could pet it with my thumb while we walked along , 5 
said Lennie. 

‘Well, you ain’t petting no mice while you walk with me. 
You remember where we’re goin’ now?’ 

Lennie looked startled and then in embarrassment hid his 
face against his knees. ‘I forgot again . 5 

‘JesUs Christ,’ George said resignedly. ‘Well — look; we’re 
gonna work on a ranch like the one we come from up 
north . 5 

‘Up north ? 5 

‘In Weed . 5 

‘Oh, sure. I remember. In Weed . 5 

‘That ranch we’re goin’ to is right down there about a 
quarter-mile. We’re gonna go in an’ see the boss. Now, look 
- I’ll give him the work tickets, but you ain’t gonna say a 
word. You jus 5 stand there and don’t say nothing. If he finds 
out what a crazy bastard you are, we won’t get no job, but 
if he sees ya work before he hears ya talk, we’re set. Ya got 
that?’ 

‘Sure, George. Sure I got it.’ 

‘O.K. Now when we go in to see the boss, what you 
gonna do?’ 

‘I ... I , 5 Lennie thought. His face grew tight with thought. 
‘I ... ain’t gonna say nothin’. Jus’ gonna stan’ there/ 

‘Good boy. That’s swell. You say that over two, three 
times so you won’t forget it/ 



12 


Of Mice and Men 

Lennie droned to himself softly: T ain’t gonna say nothin 9 
... I ain’t gonna say nothin’ ... I ain’t gonna say nothin’.’ 

‘O.EL.,’ said George. ‘An* you ain’t gonna do no bad 
things like you done in Weed, neither.’ 

Lennie looked puzzled. ‘Like I done in Weed?’ 

‘Oh, so ya forgot that too, did ya? Well, I ain’t gonna 
remind ya, fear ya do it again.’ 

A light of understanding broke on Lennie’s face. ‘They 
run us outa Weed,’ he exploded triumphantly. 

‘Run us out, hell,’ said George disgustedly. ‘We run. They 
was lookin’ for us, but they didn’t catch us.’ 

Lennie giggled happily. ‘I didn’t forget that, you bet.’ 

George lay back on the sand and crossed his hands under 
his head, and Lennie imitated him, raising his head to see 
whether he were doing it right. ‘God, you’re a lot of trouble,’ 
said George. ‘I could get along so easy and so nice if I didn’t 
have you on my tail. I could live so easy and maybe have 
a girl.’ 

For a moment Lennie lay quiet, and then he said hope- 
fully: ‘We gonna work on a ranch, George.’ 

‘Awright. You got that. But we’re gonna sleep here be- 
cause I got a reason.’ 

The day was going fast now. Only the tops of the Gabilan 
mountains flamed with the light of the sun that had gone 
from the valley. A water-snake slipped along on the pool, 
its head held up like a little periscope. The reeds jerked 
slightly in the current. Far off toward the highway a 
man shouted something, and another man shouted back. 
The sycamore limbs rustled under a little wind that died 
immediately. 

‘George — why ain’t we goin’ on to the ranch and get 
some supper? They got supper at the ranch.’ 

George rolled on his side. ‘No reason at all for you. I like 
it here. To-morra we’re gonna go to work. I seen thrashin’ 
machines on the way down. That means we’ll be bucking 



Of Mice and Men 13 

grain-bags, bustin’ a gut* To-night I’m gonna lay right here 
and look up* I like it.’ 

Lennie got up on his knees and looked down at George* 

4 Ain’t we gonna have no supper?’ 

‘Sure we are, if you gather up some dead willow sticks. 
I got three cans of beans in my bindle. You get a fire ready. 
I’ll give you a match when you get the sticks together. Then 
we’ll heat the beans and have supper.’ 

Lennie said: ‘I like beans with ketchup.’ 

‘Well, we ain’t got no ketchup* You go get wood. An’ 
don’t you fool around. It’ll be dark before long.’ 

Lennie lumbered to his feet and disappeared in the brush. 
George lay where he was and whistled softly to himself. 
There were sounds of splashings down the river in the di- 
rection Lennie had taken. George stopped whistling and 
listened. ‘Poor bastard,’ he said softly, and then went on 
whistling again. 

In a moment Lennie came crashing back through the 
brush. He carried one small willow stick in his hand. George 
sat up. ‘Aw right,’ he said brusquely. ‘Gi’me that mouse!’ 

But Lennie made an elaborate pantomime of innocence. 
‘What mouse, George? I ain’t got no mouse.’ 

George held out his hand. ‘Gome on. Give it to me. You 
ain’t puttin’ nothing over.’ 

Lennie hesitated, backed away, looked wildly at the brush 
line as though he contemplated running for his freedom. 
George said coldly: ‘You gonna give me that mouse or do 
I have to sock you?’ 

‘Give you what, George?’ 

‘You know God damn well what. I want that mouse.’ 
Lennie reluctantly reached into his pocket. His voice 
broke a little. T don’t know why I can’t keep it. It ain’t no- 
body’s mouse. I didn’t steal it. I found it lyin’ right beside 
the road*’ 

George’s hand remained outstretched imperiously. Slowly, 



14 Of Mice and Men 

like a terrier who doesn’t want to bring a ball to its master, 
Lennie approached, drew back, approached again. George 
snapped his fingers sharply, and at the sound Lennie laid 
the mouse in his hand. 

‘I wasn’t doin’ nothing bad with it, George. Jus’strokmgit.’ 

George stood up and threw the mouse as far as he could 
into the darkening brush, and then he stepped to the pool 
and washed his hands. ‘You crazy fool. Don’t you think I 
could see your feet was wet where you went across the river 
to get it?’ He heard Lennie’s whimpering cry and wheeled 
about. ‘Blubberin’ like a baby? Jesus Christ! A big guy like 
you.’ Lennie’s lip quivered and tears started in his eyes. 
‘Aw, Lennie!’ George put his hand on Lennie’s shoulder. ‘I 
ain’t takin’ it away jus’ for meanness. That mouse ain’t 
fresh, Lennie; and besides, you’ve broke it pettin’ it. You 
get another mouse that’s fresh and I’ll let you keep it a little 
while.’ 

Lennie sat down on the ground and hung his head de- 
jectedly. ‘I don’t know where there is no other mouse. I re- 
member a lady used to give ’em to me - ever’ one she got. 
But that lady ain’t here.’ 

George scoffed. ‘Lady, huh? Don’t even remember who 
that lady was. That was your own Aunt Clara. An’ she 
stopped givin’ ’em to ya. You always killed ’em.’ 

Lennie looked sadly up at him. ‘They was so little,’ he 
said apologetically. ‘I’d pet ’em, and pretty soon they bit 
my fingers and I pinched their heads a little and then they 
was dead — because they was so little. 

‘I wish’t we’d get the rabbits pretty soon, George. They 
ain’t so little.’ 

‘The hell with the rabbits. An’ you ain’t to be trusted 
with no live mice. Your Aunt Clara give you a rubber mouse 
and you wouldn’t have nothing to do with it.’ 

‘It wasn’t no good to pet,’ said Lennie. 

The flame of the sunset lifted from the mountain-tops and 



Of Mice and Men 15 

dusk came into the valley, and a half-darkness came in 
among the willows and the sycamores. A big carp rose to the 
surface of the pool, gulped air and then sank mysteriously 
into the dark water again, leaving widening rings on the 
water. Overhead the leaves whisked again and little puffs of 
willow cotton blew down and landed on the pool’s surface. 

‘You gonna get that wood?’ George demanded. ‘There’s 
plenty right up against the back of that sycamore. Flood- 
water wood. Now you get it.’ 

Lennie went behind the tree and brought out a litter of 
dried leaves and twigs. He threw them in a heap on the old 
ash-pile and went back for more and more. It was almost 
night now. A dove’s wings whistled over the water. George 
walked to the fire pile and lighted the dry leaves. The flame 
cracked up among the twigs and fell to work. George undid 
his bindle and brought out three cans of beans. He stood 
them about the fire, close in against the blaze, but not quite 
touching the flame. 

‘There’s enough beans for four men,’ George said. 

Lennie watched him from over the fire. He said patiently: 
*1 like ’em with ketchup.’ 

‘Well, we ain’t got any,’ George exploded. ‘Whatever we 
ain’t got, that’s what you want. God a’mighty, if I was 
alone I could live so easy. I could go get a job an’ work, an’ 
no trouble. No mess at all, and when the end of the month 
come I could take my fifty bucks and go into town and get 
whatever I want. Why, I could stay in a cat-house all night. 
I could eat any place I want, hotel or any place, and order 
any damn thing I could think of. An’ I could do all that 
every damn month. Get a gallon of whisky, or set in a pool- 
room and play cards or shoot pool.’ Lennie knelt and looked 
over the fire at the angry George. And Lennie’s face was 
drawn with terror. ‘An’ whatta I got?’ George went on 
furiously. ‘I got you! You can’t keep a job and you lose me 
ever’ job I get. Jus’ keep me shovin’ all over the country all 



1 6 Of Mice and Men 

the time. An* that ain’t the worst You get in trouble. You 
do bad things and I got to get you out.’ His voice rose nearly 
to a shout. ‘You crazy son-of-a-bitch. You keep me in hot 
water all the time.’ He took on the elaborate manner of 
little girls when they are mimicking one another. ‘Jus* wan- 
ted to feel that girl’s dress - jus’ wanted to pet it like it was a 
mouse ... Well, how the hell did she know you jus’ wanted 
to feel her dress? She jerks back and you hold on like it was 
a mouse. She yells and we got to hide in a irrigation ditch 
all day with guys lookin’ for us, and we got to sneak out in 
the dark and get outta the country. All the time somethin* 
like that — all the time. I wisht I could put you in a cage 
with about a million mice and let you have fun.’ His anger 
left him suddenly. He looked across the fire at Lennie’s an- 
guished face, and then he looked ashamedly at the flames. 

It was quite dark now, but the fire lighted the trunks 
of the trees and the curving branches overhead. Lennie 
crawled slowly and cautiously around the fire until he was 
close to George. He sat back on his heels. George turned the 
bean-cans so that another side faced the fire. He pretended 
to be unaware of Lennie so close beside him. 

‘George,* very softly. No answer. ‘George!* 

‘Whatta you want?’ 

‘I was only foolin’, George. I don’t want no ketchup. I 
wouldn’t eat no ketchup if it was right here beside me.’ 

‘If it was here, you could have some.’ 

‘But I wouldn’t eat none, George. I’d leave it all for you. 
You could cover your beans with it and I wouldn’t touch 
none of it.* 

George still stared morosely at the fire. ‘When I think of 
the swell time I could have without you, I go nuts. I never 
get no peace.* 

Lennie still knelt. He looked off into the darkness across 
the river. ‘George, you want I should go away and leave 
you alone?’ 



Of Mice and Men 17 

"Where the hell could you go? 9 

‘Well I could. I could go off in the hills there. Some place 
I’d find a cave. 9 

‘Yeah? How’d you eat. You ain’t got sense enough to find 
nothing to eat. 9 

‘Pd find things, George. I don’t need no nice food with 
ketchup. I’d lay out in the sun and nobodv’d hurt me. An* 
if I foun 9 a mouse, I could keep it. Nobody’d take it away 
from me. 9 

George looked quickly and searchingly at him. ‘I been 
mean, ain’t I? 9 

‘If you don’ want me I can go off in the hills an’ find a 
cave. I can go away any time. 9 

‘No — look! I was jus 9 foolin’, Lennie. Course I want you 
to stay with me. Trouble with mice is you always kill ’em. 9 
He paused. ‘Tell you what I’ll do, Lennie First chance I 
get I’ll give you a pup? Maybe you wouldn’t kill it . That’d 
be better than mice. And you could pet it harder.’ 

Lenme avoided the bait. He had sensed his advantage. ‘If 
you don’t want me, you only jus’ got to say so, and I’ll go 
off in those hills right there - right up m those hills and live 
by myself. An 3 I won’t get no mice stole from me. 9 

George said: T want you to stay with me, Lennie. Jesus 
Christ, somebody’d shoot you for a coyote if you was by 
yourself. No, you stay with me. Your Aunt Clara wouldn’t 
like you running off by yourself, even if she is dead ’ 

Lennie spoke craftily: ‘Tell me — like you done before. 9 

‘Tell you what? 9 

‘About the rabbits. 9 

George snapped: ‘You ain’t gonna put nothing over on 
me. 9 

Lennie pleaded: ‘Come on, George. Tell me. Please, 
George. Like you done before 9 

‘You get a kick outta that, don’t you. A’right, I’ll tell you, 
and then we’ll eat our supper ...’ 



1 8 Of Mice and Men 

George’s voice became deeper. He repeated his words 
rhythmically as though he had said them many times before.^ 
‘Guys like us, that work on ranches, are the loneliest guys 
in the world. They got no family. They don’t belong no 
place. They come to a ranch an’ work up a stake and then 
they go inta town and blow their stake, and the first thing 
you know they’re poundin’ their tail on some other ranch. 
They ain’t got nothing to look ahead to,’ 

Lennie was delighted. ‘That’s it - that’s it. Now tell how 
it is with us.’ 

George went on. ‘With us it ain’t like that. Wc got a 
future. We got somebody to talk to that gives a damn about 
us. We don’t have to sit in no bar-room blowin’ in our jack 
jus’ because we got no place else to go. If them other guys 
gets in jail they can rot for all anybody gives a damn. But 
not us ’ 

Lennie broke in. 6 But not us! An ’ why? Because ... because I 
'got you to look after me, and you got me to look after you, and thafs 
whyS He laughed delightedly. ‘Go on now, George.* 

‘You got it by heart. You can do it yourself.’ 

‘No, you. I forget some a’ the things. Tell about how it’s 
gonna be.’ 

‘O.K. Some day - we’re gonna get the jack together and 
we’re gonna have a little house and a couple of acres an’ a 
cow and some pigs and 

'Art live off the fatta the lan Lennie shouted. ‘An’ have 
rabbits . Go on, George! Tell about what we’re gonna have 
in the garden and about the rabbits in the cages and about 
the rain in the winter and the stove, and how thick the 
cream is on the milk like you can hardly cut it. Tell about 
that, George*’ 

‘Why’n’t you do it yourself. You know all of it.’ 

‘No ... you tell it. It ain’t the same if I tell it. Go on ... 
George. How I get to tend the rabbits.’ 

‘Well,’ said George. ‘We’ll have a big vegetable patch and 



Of Mice and Men 19 

a rabbit-hutch and chickens- And when it rains in the win- 
ter, we’ll just say the hell with gom’ to work, and we’ll build 
up a fire in the stove and set around it an’ listen to the rain 
coinin’ down on the roof - Nuts!’ He took out his pocket- 
knife. ‘I ain’t got time for no more.’ He drove his knife 
through the top of one of the bean-cans, sawed out the top 
and passed the can to Lennie. Then he opened a second can. 
From his side pocket he brought out two spoons and passed 
one of them to Lennie. 

They sat by the fire and filled their mouths with beans 
and chewed mightily. A few beans slipped out of the 
side of Lenme’s mouth. George gestured with his spoon. 
‘What you gonna say to-morrow when the boss asks you 
questions?’ 

Lennie stopped chewing and swallowed. His face was con- 
centrated. T ... I ain’t gonna ... say a word ’ 

‘Good boy! That’s fine, Lennie! Maybe you’re gettin’ 
better. When we get the coupla acres I can let you tend 
the rabbits all right. ’Specially if you remember as good as 
that.’ 

Lennie choked with pride. ‘I can remember,’ he said. 

George motioned with his spoon again. 

‘Look, Lennie, I want you to look around here. You can 
remember this place, can’t you? The ranch is about a 
quarter-mile up that way. Just follow the river.’ 

‘Sure,’ said Lennie. ‘I can remember this. Di’n’t I re- 
member about not gonna say a word?’ 

‘ ’Course you did. Well, look, Lennie - if you jus’ happen 
to get in trouble like you always done before, I want you to 
come right here an’ hide in the brush,’ 

‘Hide in the brush,’ said Lennie slowly. 

‘Hide in the brush till I come for you. Can you remember 
that?’ 

‘Sure I can, George. Hide in the brush till you come.* 

‘But you ain’t gonna get in no trouble, because if you do. 



20 Of Mice and Men 

I won’t let you tend the rabbits . 5 He threw his empty bean- 
can off into the brush. 

‘I won’t get in no trouble, George. I ain’t gonna say a 
word.’ 

‘O.K. Bring your bindle over here by the fire. It’s gonna 
be nice sleepin’ here. Lookin’ up, and the leaves. Don’t 
build up no more fire. We’ll let her die down.’ 

They made their beds on the sand, and as the blaze 
dropped from the fire the sphere oflight grew smaller; the curl- 
ing branches disappeared and only a faint glimmer showed 
where the tree-trunks were. From the darkness Lennie 
called: ‘George - you asleep?’ 

‘No. Whatta you want?’ 

‘Let’s have different colour rabbits, George.’ 

‘Sure we will,’ George said sleepily. ‘Red and blue and 
green rabbits, Lennie. Millions of ’em.’ 

‘Furry ones, George, like I seen in the fair in Sacramento.’ 

‘Sure, furry ones.’ 

‘ ’Cause I can jus’ as well go away, George, an’ live in a 
cave.* 

‘You can jus’ as well go to hell,’ said George. ‘Shut up 
now.* 

The red light dimmed on the coals. Up the hill from the 
river a coyote yammered, and a dog answered from the 
other side of the stream. The sycamore leaves whispered in a 
little night breeze. 

* 

The bunk-house was a long, rectangular building. Inside, 
the walls were white-washed and the floor unpainted. In 
three walls there were small, square windows, and, in the 
fourth, a solid door with a wooden latch. Against the walls 
were eight bunks, five of them made up with blankets and 
the other three showing their burlap ticking. Over each 
bunk there was nailed an apple-box with the opening for- 



21 


Of Mice and Man 

ward so that it made two shelves for the personal belongings 
of the occupant of the bunk. And these shelves were loaded 
with little articles, soap and talcum-powder, razors and 
those Western magazines ranch-men love to read and scoff 
at and secretly believe. And there were medicines on the 
shelves, and little vials, combs; and from nails on the box 
sides, a few neckties. Near one wall there was a black cast- 
iron stove, its stove-pipe going straight up through the ceil- 
ing. In the middle of the room stood a big square table lit- 
tered with playing-cards, and around it were grouped boxes 
for the players to sit on. 

At about ten o’clock in the morning the sun threw a 
bright dust-laden bar through one of the side windows, and 
in and out of the beam flies shot like rushing stars. 

The wooden latch raised. The door opened and a tall, 
stoop-shouldered old man came in. He was dressed in blue 
jeans and he carried a big push-broom in his left hand. Be- 
hind him came George, and behind George, Lennie. 

‘The boss was expectin’ you last night,’ the old man said. 
‘He was sore as hell when you wasn’t here to go out this 
morning.’ He pointed with his right arm, and out of the 
sleeve came a round stick-like wrist, but no hand. ‘You can 
have them two beds there,’ he said, indicating two bunks 
near the stove. 

George stepped over and threw his blankets down on the 
burlap sack of straw that was a mattress. He looked into the 
box shelf and then picked a small yellow can from it. ‘Say. 
What the hell’s this?’ 

‘I don’t know,’ said the old man. 

‘Says “positively kills lice, roaches and other scourges.” 
What the hell kind of bed you giving us, anyways? We don’t 
want no pants rabbits.’ 

The old swamper shifted his broom and held it between 
his elbow and his side while he held out his hand for the 
can. He studied the label carefully. ‘Tell you what he 



22 


Of Mice and Men 

said finally, last guy that had this bed was a blacksmith - 
hell of a nice fella and as clean a guy as you want to meet. 
Used to wash his hands even after he ate/, 

‘Then how come he got grey-backs?’ George was working 
up a slow anger. Lennie put his bindle on the neighbouring 
bunk and sat down. He watched George with open mouth. 

‘Tell you what/ said the old swamper. ‘This here black- 
smith — name of Whitey - was the kind of guy that would 
put that stuff around even if there wasn’t no bugs - just to 
make sure, see? Tell you what he used to do ... At meals he’d 
peel his boil 5 potatoes, an 5 he’d take out ever’ little spot, no 
matter what kind, before he’d eat it. And if there was a red 
splotch on an egg, he’d scrape it off. Finally quit about the 
food. That’s the kinda guy he was — clean. Used ta dress up 
Sundays even when he wasn’t going no place, put on a neck- 
tie even, and then set in the bunk-house . 5 

‘I ain’t so sure , 5 said George sceptically. ‘What did you 
say he quit for ? 5 

The old man put the yellow can in his pocket, and he 
rubbed his bristly white whiskers with his knuckles. ‘Why ... 
he ... just quit, the way a guy will. Says it was the food. Just 
wanted to move. Didn’t give no other reason but the food. 
Just says “gimme my time” one night, the way any guy 
would/ 

George lifted his tick and looked underneath it. He leaned 
over and inspected the sacking closely. Immediately Lennie 
got up and did the same with his bed. Finally George 
seemed satisfied. He unrolled his bindle and put things on 
the shelf, his razor and bar of soap, his comb and bottle of 
pills, his liniment and leather wrist-band. Then he made his 
bed up neatly with blankets. The old man said: ‘I guess the 
boss’ll be out here m a minute. He was sure burned when 
you wasn’t here this morning. Gome right in when yyre was 
eatin’ breakfast and says: “Where the hell’s them new men?” 
An 5 he give the stable buck hell, too/ 



Of Mice and Men 23 

George patted a wrinkle out of his bed, and then sat down, 
‘Give the stable buck hell ? 9 he asked. 

‘Sure. Ya see the stable buck’s a nigger.* 

‘Nigger, huh?* 

‘Yeah. Nice fella, too. Got a crooked back where a horse 
kicked him. The boss gives him hell when he*s mad. But the 
stable buck don’t give a damn about that. He reads a lot. 
Got books in his room * 

‘What kind of a guy is the boss?’ George asked. 

‘Well, he’s a pretty nice fella. Gets pretty mad sometimes, 
but he’s pretty nice. Tell ya what - know what he done 
Christmas? Brang a gallon of whisky right in here and says: 
“Drink hearty, boys. Christmas comes but once a year.” * 

‘The hell he did! Whole gallon?* 

‘Yes, sir. Jesus, we had fun. They let the nigger come in 
that night. little skinner name of Smitty took after the nig- 
ger. Done pretty good, too. The guys wouldn’t let him use 
his feet, so the nigger got him. If he coulda used his feet, 
Smitty says he woulda killed the nigger. The guys said on 
account of the nigger’s got a crooked back, Smitty can’t use 
his feet.’ He paused in relish of the memory. ‘After that the 
guys went into Soledad and raised hell. I didn’t go in there, 
I ain’t got the poop no more.* 

Lennie was just finishing making his bed. The wooden 
latch raised again and the door opened. A little stocky man 
stood in the open doorway. He wore blue jean trousers, a 
flannel shirt, a black, unbuttoned vest and a black coat. His 
thumbs were stuck m his belt, on each side of a square steel 
buckle. On his head was a soiled brown Stetson hat, and he 
wore high-heeled boots and spurs to prove he was not a 
labouring man. 

The old swamper looked quickly at him, and then shuffled 
to the door rubbing his whiskers with his knuckles as he 
went. ‘Them guys just come,’ he said, and shuffled past the 
boss and out the door. 



24 Of Mice and Men 

The boss stepped into the room with the short, quick steps 
of a fat-legged man. T wrote Murray and Ready I wanted 
two men this morning. You got your work slips? 9 George 
reached into his pocket and produced the slips and handed 
them to the boss. Tt wasn’t Murray and Ready’s fault. Says 
right here on the slip that you was to be here for work this 
morning. 5 

George looked down at his feet. ‘Bus-driver give us a bum 
steer , 5 he said. ‘We hadda walk ten miles. Says we was here 
when we wasn’t. We couldn’t get no rides in the morning . 5 

The boss squinted his eyes. ‘Well, I had to send out the 
grain teams short two buckers. Won’t do any good to go 
out now till after dinner . 5 He pulled his time-book out of 
his pocket and opened it where a pencil was stuck between 
the leaves. George scowled meaningfully at Lennie, and 
Lennie nodded to show that he understood. The boss licked 
his pencil. ‘What’s your name ? 5 

‘George Milton . 5 

‘And what’s yours ? 5 

George said; ‘His name’s Lennie Small . 5 

The names were entered in the book. ‘Le’s see, this is the 
twentieth, noon the twentieth . 5 He closed the book. ‘Where 
you boys been working ? 5 

‘Up around Weed , 5 said George. 

‘You, too ? 5 to Lennie. 

‘Yeah, him too , 5 said George. 

The boss pointed a playful finger at Lennie. ‘He ain’t 
much of a talker, is he?’ 

‘No, he ain’t, but he’s sure a hell of a good worker. Strong 
as a bull . 5 

Lennie smiled to himself. ‘Strong as a bull , 5 he repeated. 

George scowled at him, and Lennie dropped his head in 
shame at having forgotten. 

The boss said suddenly; ‘Listen, Small ! 5 Lennie raised his 
head. ‘What can you do ? 5 



Of Mice and Men 25 

In a panic, Lennie looked at George for help. ‘He can do 
anything you tell him/ said George. ‘He’s a good skinner. 
He can rassel grain-bags, drive a cultivator. He can do any- 
thing. Just give him a try/ 

The boss turned to George. ‘Then why don’t you let him 
answer? What you trying to put over?’ 

George broke in loudly: ‘Oh ! I ain’t saying he’s bright. 
He ain’t. But I say he’s a God damn good worker. He can 
put up a four-hundred-pound bale/ 

The boss deliberately put the little book in his pocket. He 
hooked his thumbs in his belt and squinted one eye nearly 
closed. ‘Say - what you sellm’?’ 

‘Huh?’ 

‘I said what stake you got in this guy? You takin’ his pay 
away from him?’ 

‘No, ’course I ain’t. Why ya think I’m sellin’ him out?’ 

‘Well, I never seen one guy take so much trouble for 
another guy. I just like to know what your interest is/ 

George said: ‘He’s my ... cousin. I told his old lady I’d 
take care of him. He got kicked in the head by a horse when 
he was a kid. He’s awright Just ain’t bright. But he can do 
anything you tell him/ 

The boss turned half away. ‘Well, God knows he don’t 
need any brains to buck barley bags. But don’t you try to 
put nothing over, Milton. I got my eye on you. Why’d you 
quit in Weed?’ 

‘Job was done,’ said George promptly. 

‘What kinda job?’ 

‘We ... we was diggin’ a cesspool/ 

‘All right. But don’t try to put nothing over, ’cause you 
can’t get away with nothing. I seen wise guys before. Go on 
out with the grain teams after dinner. They’re pickin’ up 
barley at the threshing machine. Go out with Slim’s team/ 

‘Slim?’ 

‘Yeah. Big tall skinner You’ll see him at dinner.’ He 



26 Of Mice and Men 

turned abruptly and went to the door, but before he went 
out he turned and looked for a long moment at the two men. 

When the sound of his footsteps had died away, George 
turned on Lenme. ‘So you wasn’t gonna say a word. You 
was gonna leave your big flapper shut and leave me do the 
talkin’. Damn near lost us the job.’ 

Lennie stared helplessly at his hands. T forgot, George.’ 

‘Yeah, you forgot You always forget, an’ I got to talk you 
out of it. 9 He sat down heavily on the bunk 

‘Now he’s got his eye on us. Now we got to be careful and 
not make no slips. You keep your big flapper shut after this. 9 
He fell morosely silent. 

‘George. 9 

‘What you want now? 9 

‘I wasn’t kicked in the head with no horse, was I, George? 9 

‘Be a damn good thing if you was,’ George said viciously* 
‘Save ever’body a hell of a lot of trouble.’ 

‘You said I was your cousin, George.’ 

‘Well, that was a lie. An’ I’m damn glad it was. If I was a 
relative of yours I’d shoot myself.’ He stopped suddenly, 
stepped to the open front door and peered out. ‘Say, what 
the hell you doin’ listenin’?’ 

The old man came slowly into the room. He had his 
broom in his hand. And at his heels there walked a drag- 
footed sheep-dog, grey of muzzle, and with pale, blind old 
eyes. The dog struggled lamely to the side of the room and 
lay down, grunting softly to himself and licking his grizzled, 
moth-eaten coat. The swamper watched him until he was 
settled. ‘I wasn’t listenin’. I was jus’ standm’ in the shade a 
minute scratchin’ my dog. I jus’ now finished swampin’ out 
the wash-house.’ 

‘You was pokin’ your big ears into our business, 9 George 
said. ‘I don’t like nobody to get nosey. 9 

The old man looked uneasily from George to Lennie, and 
then back. ‘I jus 9 come there, 9 he said. T didn’t hear nothing 



Of Mice and Men 27 

you guys was sayin 3 . I ain’t interested in nothing you was 
sayin’. A guy on a ranch don’t never listen nor he don’t ast 
no questions/ 

‘Damn right he don’t/ said George, slightly mollified, ‘not 
if he wants to stay workin 5 long/ But he was reassured by 
the swamper’s defence. ‘Come on in and set down a minute/ 
he said. ‘That’s a hell of an old dog/ 

‘Yeah. I had 5 im ever since he was a pup. God, he was a 
good sheep-dog when he was younger/ He stood his broom 
against the wall and he rubbed his white bristled cheek with 
his knuckles. ‘How’d you like the boss? 3 he asked. 

‘Pretty good. Seemed awright/ 

‘He’s a nice fella/ the swamper agreed. ‘You got to take 
him right/ 

At that moment a young man came into the bunk-house; 
a thin young man with a brown face, with brown eyes and 
a head of tightly curled hair. He wore a work glove on his 
left hand, and, like the boss, he wore high-heeled boots. 
‘Seen my old man? 3 he asked. 

The swamper said: ‘He was here jus 3 a minute ago, Gurley. 
Went over to the cook-house, X think/ 

‘I’ll try to catch him, 3 said Gurley. His eyes passed over the 
new men and he stopped. He glanced coldly at George and 
then at Lennie. His arms gradually bent at the elbows and 
his hands closed into fists. He stiffened and went into a slight 
crouch. His glance was at once calculating and pugnacious. 
Lennie squirmed under the look and shifted his f^et ner- 
vously. Gurley stepped gingerly close to him. ‘You the new 
guys the old man was waitin’ for?’ 

‘We just come in/ said George. 

‘Let the big guy talk. 3 

Lennie twisted with embarrassment. 

George said: ‘S’pose he don’t want to talk? 3 

Curley lashed his body around. ‘By Christ, he’s gotta talk 
when he’s spoke to. What the hell are you gettin’ into it for?’ 



28 Of Mice and Men 

‘We travel together/ said George coldly. 

‘Oh, so it’s that way / 

George was tense and motionless/* Yeah, it’s that way/ 

Lennie was looking helplessly to George for instruction. 

‘An’ you won’t let the big guy talk, is that it?’ 

'He can talk if he wants to tell you anything ’ He nodded 
slightly to Lennie. 

* We jus’ come in,’ said Lennie softly. 

Curley stared levelly at him. ‘Well, nex’ time you answer 
when you’re spoke to.’ He turned towards the door and 
walked out, and his elbows were still bent out a little. 

George watched him out, and then he turned back to the 
swamper. ‘Say, what the hell’s he got on his shoulder? Lem 
me didn’t do nothing to him/ 

The old man looked cautiously at the door to make sure 
no one was listening. ‘That’s the boss’s son,’ he said quietly. 
‘Curley’s pretty handy. He done quite a bit in the ring. He’s 
a lightweight, and he’s handy/ 

‘Well, let him be handy,’ said George. ‘He don’t have to 
take after Lennie. Lennie didn’t do nothing to him. What’s 
he got against Lennie?’ 

The swamper considered: Well - tell you what. Curley’s 
like a lot of little guys. He hates big guys. He’s alia time 
picking scraps with big guys. Kind of like he’s mad at ’em 
because he ain’t a big guy. You seen little guys like that, 
ain’t you? Always scrappy?’ 

‘Sure,’ said George. ‘I seen plenty tough little guys. But 
this Curley better not make no mistakes about Lennie. 
Lennie ain’t handy, but this Curley punk is gonna get hurt 
if he messes around with Lennie/ 

‘Well, Curley’s pretty handy/ the swamper said scepti- 
cally. ‘Never did seem right to me. S’pose Curley jumps a big 
guy an’ licks him. Ever’body says what a game guy Curley 
is. And s’pose he does the same thing and gets licked. Then 
ever’body says the big guy oughtta pick somebody his own 



Of Mice and Men 29 

size, and maybe they gang up on the big guy. Never did 
seem right to me. Seems like Curley ain’t givin’ nobody a 
chance/ 

George was watching the door. He said ominously; ‘Well, 
he better watch out for Lennie. Lennie ain’t no fighter, but 
Lennie’s strong and quick and Lenme don’t know no rules/ 
He walked to the square table and sat down on one of the 
boxes. He gathered some of the cards together and shuffled 
them. 

The old man sat down on another box. ‘Don’t tell Curley 
I said none of this. He’d slough me. He just don’t give a 
damn. Won’t ever get canned ’cause his old man’s the boss/ 

George cut the cards and began turning them over, look- 
ing at each one and throwing it down on a pile. He said: 
‘This guy Curley sounds like a son-of-a-bitch to me. I don’t 
like mean little guys/ 

‘Seems to me like he’s worse lately,’ said the swamper. 
‘He got married a couple of weeks ago. Wife lives over in 
the boss’s house. Seems like Curley is cockier’n ever since 
he got married/ 

George grunted: ‘Maybe he’s showin’ off for his wife/ 

The swamper warmed to his gossip. ‘You seen that glove 
on his left hand/ 

‘Yeah. I seen it/ 

‘Well, that glove’s fiilla vaseline/ 

‘Vaseline? What the hell for?’ 

‘Well, I tell ya what, Gurley says he’s keepin’ that hand 
soft for his wife/ 

George studied the cards absorbedly. ‘That’s a dirty thing 
to tell around/ he said. 

The old man was reassured. He had drawn a derogatory 
statement from George. He felt safe now, and he spoke more 
confidently. ‘Wait’ll you see Curley’s wife/ 

George cut the cards again and put out a solitaire lay, 
slowly and deliberately. ‘Purty?’ he asked casually. 



30 


Of Mice and Men 

‘Yeah. Purty ... but ...’ 

George studied his cards. ‘But what? 5 

‘Well - she got the eye. 5 

‘Yeah? Married two weeks and got the eye? Maybe that’s 
why Gurley’s pants is full of ants. 5 

‘I seen her give Slim the eye. Slim’s a jerkline skinner. 
Hell of a nice fella. Slim don’t need to wear no high-heeled 
boots on a grain team. I seen her give Slim the eye. Gurley 
never seen it. An 5 I seen her give Carlson the eye. 5 

George pretended a lack of interest. ‘Looks like we was 
gonna have fun. 5 

The swamper stood up from his box. ‘Know what 1 
think? 5 George did not answer. ‘Well, I think Gurley’s mar- 
ried ... a tart. 5 

‘He ain’t the first, 5 said George. ‘There’s plenty done that. 5 

The old man moved toward the door, and his ancient dog 
lifted his head and peered about, and then got painfully to 
his feet to follow. ‘I gotta be settin 5 out the washbasins for 
the guys The teams’ll be in before long. You guys gonna 
buck barley?’ 

‘Yeah. 5 

‘You won’t tell Gurley nothing I said? 5 

‘Hell, no. 5 

‘Well, you look her over, mister. You see if she ain’t a 
tart. 5 He stepped out the door into the brilliant sunshine. 

George laid down his cards thoughtfully, turned his piles 
of three. He built four clubs on his ace pile The sun square 
Was on the floor now, and the flies whipped through it like 
sparks. A sound of jingling harness and the croak of heavy- 
laden axles sounded from outside. From the distance came 
a clear call. ‘Stable Buck - ooh, sta-able Buck! 5 And then: 
‘Where the hell is that God damn nigger? 5 

George stared at his solitaire lay, and then he flounced 
the cards together and turned around to Lennie. Lennie was 
lying down on the bunk watching him. 



Of Mice and Aden 31 

‘Look, LennieS This here ain't no set-up- I'm scared- You 
gonna have trouble with that Curley guy. I seen that kind 
before He was kinda feelin' you out. He figures he's got you 
scared and he's gonna take a sock at you the first chance he 
gets-' 

Lenme’s eyes were frightened. T don't want no trouble,' 
he said plaintively. ‘Don't let him sock me, George.' 

George got up and went over to Lennie’s bunk and sat 
down on it. T hate that kinda bastard,' he said. T seen 
plenty of 'em. Like the old guy says, Curley don't take no 
chances. He always wins.' He thought for a moment- Tf he, 
tangles with you, Lennie, we're gonna get the can. Don't 
make no mistake about that. He’s the boss's son. Look, Len~ 
nie. You try to keep away from him, will you? Don't never 
speak to him. If he comes in here you move clear to the other 
side of the room. Will you do that, Lennie?' 

T don’t want no trouble,' Lennie mourned. T never done 
nothing to him.' 

‘Well, that won't do you no good if Curley wants to plug 
himself up for a fighter. Just don’t have nothing to do with 
him. Will you remember?’ 

‘Sure, George. I ain't gonna say a word.' 

The sound of the approaching grain teams was louder, 
thud of big hooves on hard ground, drag of brakes and 
the jingle of trace chains. Men were calling back and forth 
from the teams. George, sitting on the bunk beside Lennie, 
frowned as he thought. Lennie asked timidly; ‘You ain’t 
mad, George?' 

‘I ain’t mad at you. I'm mad at this here Curley bastard. 
I hoped we was gonna get a little stake together - maybe a 
hundred dollars.' His tone grew decisive. ‘You keep away 
from Curley, Lennie,' 

‘Sure I will, George. I won’t say a word ' 

‘Don't let him pull you in - but - if the son-of-a-bitch 
socks you — let 'im have it.' 



32 Of Mice and Men 

‘Let ’im have what, George? 5 

‘Never mind, never mind. I’ll tell you when. I hate that 
kind of a guy. Look, Lennie, if you get in any kind of trouble, 
you remember what I told you to do? 9 

Lennie raised up on his elbow. His face contorted with 
thought. Then his eyes moved sadly to George’s face ‘If I 
get in any trouble, you ain’t gonna let me tend the rabbits. 9 

‘That’s not what I meant. You remember where we slep’ 
last night? Down by the river?’ 

‘Yeah. I remember. Oh, sure I remember! I go there an 9 
Jxide in the brush.’ 

‘Hide till I come for you. Don’t let nobody see you. Hide 
in the brush by the river. Say that over.’ 

‘Hide in the brush by the river, down in the brush by the 
river. 9 

‘If you get in trouble.’ 

‘If I get in trouble.’ 

A brake screeched outside. A call came: ‘Stable - Buck. 
Oh! Sta-able Buck. 9 

George said: ‘Say it over to yourself, Lennie, so you won’t 
forget it. 9 

Both men glanced up, for the rectangle of sunshine in the 
doorway was cut off. A girl was standing there looking in. 
She had full, rouged lips and wide-spaced eyes, heavily made 
up. Her finger-nails were red. Her hair hung in little rolled 
clusters, like sausages. She wore a cotton house dress and 
red mules, on the insteps of which were little bouquets of 
red ostrich feathers. ‘I’m lookin’ for Curley, 9 she said. Her 
voice had a nasal, brittle quality. 

George looked away from her and then back. ‘He was in 
here a minute ago, but he went.’ 

‘Oh! 9 She put her hands behind her back and leaned 
against the door-frame so that her body was thrown for- 
ward. ‘You’re the new fellas that lust come, ain’t ya?’ 

‘Yeah. 9 



Of Mice and Mm 33 

Lennie’s eyes moved down over her body, and although 
she did not seem to be looking at Lennie, she bridled a little. 
She looked at her finger-nails. ‘Sometimes Curley’s in here/ 
she explained. 

George said brusquely: ‘Well, he ain’t now.’ 

‘If he ain’t, I guess I better look some place else/ she said 
playfully. 

Lennie watched her, fascinated. George said: ‘If I see 
him. I’ll pass the word you was looking for him.’ 

She smiled archly and twitched her body. ‘Nobody can’t 
blame a person for lookin’/ she said. There were footsteps be- 
hind her, going by. She turned her head. ‘Hi, Slim/ she said. 

Slim’s voice came through the door. ‘Hi, Good-lookin’.’ 

‘I’m tryin’ to find Curley, Slim.’ 

‘Well, you ain’t tryin’ very hard. I seen him goin’ in your 
house ’ 

She was suddenly apprehensive. * ’Bye, boys/ she called 
into the bunk-house, and she hurried away. 

George looked around at Lennie. ‘Jesus, what a tramp/ 
he said. ‘So that’s what Curley picks for a wife.’ 

‘She’s purty/ said Lennie defensively. 

‘Yeah, and she’s sure hidin’ it. Gurley got his work ahead 
of him. Bet she’d clear out for twenty bucks.’ 

Lennie still stared at the doorway where she had been. 
‘Gosh, she was purty.’ He smiled admiringly. George looked 
quickly down at him and then he took him by an ear and 
shook him. 

‘Listen to me, you crazy bastard/ he said fiercely. ‘Don’t 
you even take a look at that bitch. I don’t care what she 
says and what she does. I seen ’em poison before, but I never 
seen no piece of jail bait worse than her. You leave her be.’ 

Lennie tried to disengage his ear. ‘I never done nothing, 
George.’ 

‘No, you never. But when she was standin’ m the doorway 
showin’ her legs, you wasn’t lookin’ the other way, neither.’ 



34 Of Mice and Men 

T never meant no harm, George. Honest I never/ 

4 Well, you keep away from her, ’cause she’s a rat-trap if I 
ever seen one. You let Gurley take the rap. He let himself 
in for it. Glove fulla vaseline,’ George said disgustedly. ‘An’ 
I bet he’s eatin’ raw eggs and writin’ to the patent medicine 
houses.’ 

Lennie cried out suddenly: ‘I don’ like this place, George. 
This ain’t no good place. I wanna get outa here ’ 

‘We gotta keep it till we get a stake. We can’t help it, Len- 
nie. We’ll get out jus’ as soon as we can. I don’t like it no 
better than you do.’ He went back to the table and set out 
a new solitaire hand. ‘No, I don’t like it,’ he said. ‘For two 
bits I’d shove out of here. If we can get jus’ a few dollars in 
the poke we’ll shove off and go up the American River and 
pan gold. We can make maybe a couple of dollars a day 
there, and we might hit a pocket.’ 

Lennie leaned eagerly toward him ‘Le’s go, George 
Le’s get outa here. It’s mean here.’ 

‘We gotta stay,’ George said shortly. ‘Shut up now. The 
guys’ll be cornin’ in.’ 

From the wash-room near-by came the sound of runmng 
water and rattling basins. George studied the cards. ‘Maybe 
we oughtta wash up,’ he said. ‘But we ain’t done nothing to 
get dirty.’ 

A tall man stood in the doorway He held a crushed Stet- 
son hat under his arm while he combed his long, black, 
damp hair straight back. Like the others, he wore blue jeans 
and a short denim jacket. When he had finished combing 
his hair he moved into the room, and he moved with a 
majesty only achieved by royalty and master craftsmen. He 
was a jerkline skinner, the prince of the ranch, capable of 
driving ten, sixteen, even twenty mules with a single line to 
the leaders. He was capable of killing a fly on the wheeler’s 
butt with a bull whip without touching the mule. There was 
a gravity in his manner and a quiet so profound that all talk 



Of Mice and Men 35 

stopped when he spoke. His authority was $0 great that his 
word was taken on any subject, be it politics or love. This 
was Slim, the jerkline skinner. His hatchet face was ageless. 
He might have been thirty-five or fifty. His ear heard more 
than was said to him, and his slow speech had overtones not 
of thought, but of understanding beyond thought. His hands, 
large and lean, were as delicate in their action as those of a 
temple dancer. 

He smoothed out his crushed hat, creased it in the middle 
and put it on He looked kindly at the two in the bunk- 
house. ‘It’s brighter’n a bitch outside, 5 he said gently. ‘Can’t 
hardly see nothing in hqre. You the new guys? 5 

‘Just come, 5 said George. 

‘Gonna buck barley? 5 

‘That’s what the boss says. 5 

Slim sat down on a box across the table from George. He 
studied the solitaire hand that was upside-down to him. 
‘Hope you get on my team, 5 he said. His voice was very 
gentle. T gotta pair of punks on my team that don’t know 
a barley bag from a blue ball. You guys ever bucked any 
barley? 5 

‘Hell, yes, 5 said George. T ain’t nothing to scream about, 
but that big bastard there can put up more grain alone than 
most pairs can. 5 

Lennie, who had been following the conversation back 
and forth with his eyes, smiled complacently at the compli- 
ment. Slim looked approvingly at George for having given 
the compliment. He leaned over the table and snapped the 
comer of a loose card. ‘You guys travel around together? 5 
His tone was friendly. It invited confidence without de- 
manding it 

‘Sure, 5 said George. ‘We kinda look after each other. 5 He 
indicated Lennie with his thumb. ‘He ain’t bright. Hell of a 
good worker, though. Hell of a nice fella, but he ain’t bright. 
I’ve knew him for a long time. 5 



36 Of Mice and Men 

Slim looked through George and beyond him. ‘Ain’t many 
guys travel around together, 9 he mused. ‘I don’t know why. 
Maybe ever 5 body m the whole damn world is scared of each 
other/ 

‘It’s a lot nicer to go around with a guy you know/ said 
George. 

A powerful, big-stomached man came into the bunk- 
house. His head still dripped water from the scrubbing and 
dousing. ‘Hi, Slim, 9 he said, and then stopped and stared at 
George and Lennie. 

‘These guys jus 9 come, 9 said Slim by way of introduction. 

‘Glad to meet ya, 9 the big man said ‘My name’s Carlson/ 

‘I’m George Milton. This here’s Lennie Small/ 

‘Glad ta meet ya/ Carlson said again. ‘He ain’t very 
small/ He chuckled softly at his joke, ‘Ain’t small at all/ he 
repeated. ‘Meant to ask you, Slim - how’s your bitch? I seen 
she wasn’t under your wagon this morning/ 

‘She slang her pups last night/ said Slim. ‘Nine of ’em. I 
drowned four of ’em right off. She couldn’t feed that many/ 

‘Got five left, huh? 9 

‘Yeah, five. I kept the biggest. 9 

‘What kinda dogs you think they’re gonna be? 9 

‘I dunno/ said Slim. ‘Some kinda shepherds, I guess. 
That’s the most kind I seen around here when she was in 
heat/ 

Carlson went on: ‘Got five pups, huh. Gonna keep all of 
’em? 9 

‘I dunno. Have to keep ’em a while so they can drink 
Lulu’s milk/ 

Carlson said thoughtfully: ‘Well, looka here. Slim. I been 
thinkin’. That dog of Candy’s is so God damn old he can’t 
hardly walk. Stinks like hell, too. Ever 9 time he comes into 
the bunk-house I can smell him for two, three days. Why’n’t 
you get Candy to shoot his old dog and give him one of the 
pups to raise up. I can smell that dog a mile away. Got no 



Of Mice and Men 37 

teeth, damn near blind, can’t eat. Candy feeds him milk. 
He can’t chew nothing else 5 

George had been staring intently at Slim. Suddenly a 
triangle began to ring outside, slowly at first, and then faster 
and faster until the beat of it disappeared into one ringing 
sound. It stopped as suddenly as it had started. 

"There she goes/ said Carlson. 

Outside, there was a burst of voices as a group of men 
went by. 

Slim stood up slowly and with dignity. ‘You guys better 
come on while they’s still something to eat. Won’t be noth- 
ing left in a couple of minutes.’ 

Carlson stepped back to let Slim precede him, and then 
the two of them went out the door. 

Lennie was watching George excitedly George rumpled 
his cards into a messy pile. ‘Yeah!’ George said, ‘I heard 
him, Lennie. I’ll ask him.’ 

‘A brown and white one/ Lennie cried excitedly. 

‘Come on. Le’s get dinner. I don’t know whether he got a 
brown and white one.’ 

Lennie didn’t move from his bunk. ‘You ask him right 
away, George, so he won’t kill no more of ’em.’ 

‘Sure. Gome on now, get up on your feet/ 

Lennie rolled off his bunk and stood up, and the two of 
them started for the door. Just as they reached it, Curley 
bounced in. 

‘You seen a girl around here?’ he demanded angrily. 

George said coldly: ‘ ’Bout half an hour ago maybe/ 

‘Well, what the hell was she doin’?’ 

George stood still, watching the angry little man. He said 
insultingly: ‘She said - she was lookin’ for you/ 

Gurley seemed really to see George for the first time. His 
eyes flashed over George, took in his height, measured his 
reach, looked at his trim middle. ‘Well, which way’d she 
go?’ he demanded at last. 



38 Of Mice and Men 

T dunno,’ said George. ‘I didn’ watch her go. 5 

Gurley scowled at him, and turning, hurried out of the door. 

George said: ‘Ya know* Lennie, I’m scared I’m gonna 
tangle with that bastard myself. I hate his guts Jesus Christ! 
Gome on. They won’t be a damn thing left to eat.’ 

They went out the door. The sunshine lay in a thin line 
under the window. From a distance there could be heard a 
rattle of dishes 

After a moment the ancient dog walked lamely in through 
the open door. He gazed about with mild, half-blind eyes. 
He sniffed, and then lay down and put his head between his 
paws. Curley popped into the doorway again and stood 
looking into the room The dog raised his head, but when 
Gurley jerked out, the grizzled head sank to the floor again. 

* 

Although there was evening brightness showing through 
the windows of the bunk-house, inside it was dusk. Through 
the open door came the thuds and occasional clangs of a 
horse-shoe game, and now and then the sound of voices 
raised in approval or derision. 

Slim and George came into the darkening bunk-house to- 
gether. Slim reached up over the card- table and turned on 
the tin-shaded electric light. Instantly the table was bril- 
liant with light, and the cone of the shade threw its bright- 
ness straight downward, leaving the corners of the bunk- 
house still in dusk. Slim sat down on a box and George took 
his place opposite. 

Tt wasn’t nothing,’ said Slim. T would of had to drowned 
most of ’em, anyways. No need to thank me about that.’ 

George said: Tt wasn’t much to you, maybe, but it was 
a hell of a lot to him Jesus Christ, I don’t know how we’re 
gonna get him to sleep in here. He’ll want to sleep right out 
in the barn with ’em. We’ll have trouble keepin’ him from 
getting right m the box with them pups ’ 



Of Mice and Men 39 

‘It wasn’t nothing,’ Slim repeated. ‘Say, you sure was 
right about him. Maybe he ain’t bright, but I never seen 
such a worker. He damn near killed his partner buckin’ bar- 
ley. There ain’t nobody can keep up with him. God Al- 
mighty, I never seen such a strong guy.’ 

George spoke proudly. ‘Jus’ tell Lenme what to do an* 
he’ll do it if it don’t take no figuring. He can’t think of 
nothing to do himself, but he sure can take orders.’ 

There was a clang of horse-shoe on iron stake outside and 
a little cheer of voices. 

Slim moved back slightly so the light was not on his face. 
‘Funny how you an’ him string along together.’ It was Slim’s 
calm invitation to confidence. 

‘What’s funny about it?’ George demanded defensively. 

‘Oh, I dunno. Hardly none of the guys ever travel to- 
gether. I hardly never seen two guys travel together. You 
know how the hands are, they just come m and get their 
bunk and work a month, and then they quit and go out 
alone. Never seem to give a damn about nobody It jus’ 
seems kinda funny a cuckoo like him and a smart little guy 
like you travellin’ together.’ 

‘He ain’t no cuckoo,’ said George. ‘He’s dumb as hell, but 
he ain’t crazy. An’ I ain’t so bright neither, or I wouldn’t 
be buckin’ barley for my fifty and found. If I was bright, if 
I was even a little bit smart, I’d have my own little place, an* 
I’d be bringin’ in my own crops, ’stead of doin’ all the work 
and not getting what comes up outa the ground.’ George fell 
silent. He wanted to talk. Slim neither encouraged nor dis- 
couraged him. He just sat back quiet and receptive. 

‘It ain’t so funny, him an’ me goin’ aroun’ together,* 
George said at last. ‘Him and me was both born in Auburn. 
I knowed his Aunt Clara. She took him when he was a baby 
and raised him up. When his Aunt Clara died, Lennie just 
come along with me out workin’. Got kinda used to each 
other after a little while.’ 



40 


Of Mice and Men 


‘Um; said Slim. 

George looked over at Slim and saw the calm, God-like 
eyes fastened on him Tunny , 5 said George. ‘ I used to have 
a hell of a lot of fun with ’im. Used to play jokes on 3 im 
’cause he was too dumb to take care of ’imself. But he was 
too dumb even to know he had a joke played on him. I had 
fun. Made me seem God damn smart alongside of him. Why, 
he’d do any damn thing I tol’ him. If I tol’ him to walk over 
a cliff, over he’d go. That wasn’t so damn much fun after 
a while He never got mad about it, neither. I’ve beat the 
hell outa him, and he couda bust every bone in my body 
jus’ with his han’s, but he never lifted a finger against me/ 
George’s voice was taking on the tone of confession. ‘Tell 
you what made me stop that. One day a bunch of guys was 
standin’ around up on the Sacramento River. I was feelm’ 
pretty smart. I turns to Lennie and says: “Jump in.” An’ he 
jumps. Couldn’t swim a stroke. He damn near drowned 
before we could get him. An’ he was so damn nice to me for 
pullin’ him out. Clean forgot I told him to jump in. Well, 
I ain’t done nothing like that no more.’ 

‘He’s a mce fella,’ said Slim. c Guy don’t need no sense to 
be a nice fella. Seems to me sometimes it jus’ works the other 
way around. Take a real smart guy and he ain’t haidly ever 
a mce fella.’ 

George stacked the scattered cards and began to lay out 
his solitaire hand. The shoes thudded on the ground outside. 
At the windows the light of the evening still made the win- 
dow squares bright. 

T ain’t got no people,’ George said. T seen the guys that 
go around on the ranches alone. That ain’t no good They 
don’t have no fun. After a long time they get mean They 
get wantin’ to fight all the time.’ 

‘Yeah, they get mean,’ Slim agreed. ‘They get so they 
don’t want to talk to nobody.’ 

‘Course Lennie’s a God damn nuisance most of the 



Of Mice and Men 41 

time/ said George, ‘But you get used to goin’ around with 
a guy an’ you can't get rid of him/ 

‘He ain’t mean/ said Siim T can see Lennie ain’t a bit 
mean ’ 

‘Course he ain’t mean. But he gets in trouble alia time 
because he’s so God damn dumb. Like what happened in 
Weed../ He stopped, stopped in the middle of turning over 
a card. He looked alarmed and peered over at Slim. ‘You 
wouldn’t tell nobody/ 

‘What’d he do in Weed?’ Slim asked calmly. 

‘You wouldn’ tell? - no, course you wouldn’/ 

‘What’d he do in Weed?’ Slim asked again. 

‘Well, he seen this girl in a red dress. Dumb bastard like 
he is, he wants to touch ever’thmg he likes Just wants to feel 
it. So he reaches out to feel this red dress an’ the girl lets out 
a squawk, and that gets Lenme all mixed up, and he holds 
on ’cause that’s the only thing he can think to do. Well, this 
girl squawks and squawks I was jus’ a little bit off, and I 
heard all the yellin’, so I comes running, an’ by that time 
Lennie’s so scared all he can think to do is jus’ hold on. I 
socked him over the head with a fence picket to make him 
let go. He was so scairt he couldn’t let go of that dress. And 
he’s so God damn strong, you know/ 

Slim’s eyes were level and unwinking. He nodded very 
slowly. ‘So what happens?’ 

George carefully built his line of solitaire cards. ‘Weil, 
that girl rabbits m an’ tells the law she been raped. The guys 
in Weed start a party out to lynch Lenme. So we sit in a 
irrigation ditch under water all the rest of that day. Got on’y 
our heads sticking outa water, an’ up under the grass that 
sticks out from the side of the ditch. An’ that night we 
scrammed outa there/ 

Slim sat in silence for a moment, ‘Didn’t hurt the girl 
none, huh?’ he asked finally. 

‘Hell, no. He just scared her. I’d be scared too if he 



42 Of Mice and Men 

grabbed me. But he never hurt her. He jus’ wanted to touch 
that red dress, like he wants to pet them pups all the time/ 

‘He ain’t mean,’ said Slim. e I can tell a mean guy a mile 

off/ 

‘Course he ain’t, and he’ll do any damn thing I ../ 

Lennie came in through the door. He wore his blue denim 
coat over his shoulders like a cape, and he walked hunched 
way over. 

‘Hi, Lennie,’ said George ‘How do you like the pup 
now?’ 

Lennie said breathlessly: ‘He’s brown an’ white jus’ like I 
wanted/ He went directly to his bunk and lay down and 
turned his face to the wall and drew up hxs knees. 

George put down his cards very deliberately. ‘Lennie,’ he 
said sharply. 

Lenme twisted his neck and looked over his shoulder. 

‘Huh? What you want, George?’ 

‘I tol’ you you couldn’t bring that pup in here ’ 

‘What pup, George? I ain’t got no pup.’ 

George went quickly to him, grabbed him by the shoulder 
and rolled him over. He reached down and picked the tiny 
puppy from where Lennie had been concealing it against his 
stomach* 

Lennie sat up quickly. ‘Give ’um to me, George/ 

George said: ‘You get right up an’ take this pup back to 
the nest. He’s gotta sleep with his mother. You want to kill 
him? Just born last night an’ you take him out of the nest. 
You take him back or I’ll tell Slim not to let you have him/ 

Lennie held out his hands pleadingly. ‘Give ’um to me, 
George. I’ll take ’um back. I didn’t mean no harm, George. 
Honest I didn’t. I jus’ wanted to pet ’um a little ’ 

George handed the pup to him. ‘Awright. You get him 
back there quick, and don’t you take him out no more. 
You’ll kill him, the first thing you know.’ Lennie fairly scut- 
tled out of the room. 



Of Alice and Men 43 

Slim had not moved. His calm eyes followed Lennie out 
the door, ‘Jesus, 5 he said, 'He’s jes 5 like a kid, ain’t he? 5 

‘Sure he 5 s jes 5 like a kid. There ain’t no more harm in him 
than a kid neither, except he 3 s so strong. I bet he won’t come 
m here to sleep to-night He’d sleep right alongside that box 
in the barn. Well - let ’im. He ain’t doin’ no harm out there. 5 

It was almost dark outside now Old Candy, the swamper, 
came in and went to his bunk, and behind him struggled 
his old dog ‘Hello, Slim. Hello, George. Didn’t neither of 
you play horse-shoes? 5 

‘I don’t like to play ever’ night,’ said Slim. 

Candy went on: ‘Either you guys got a slug of whisky? I 
gotta gut ache. 5 

‘I ain’t, 5 said Slim. ‘I’d drink it myself if I had, an 5 I ain’t 
got a gut ache neither. 5 

‘Gotta bad gut ache, 5 said Candy. ‘Them God damn 
turnips give it to me. I knowed they was going to before I 
ever eat ’em.’ 

The thick-bodied Carlson came in out of the darkening 
yard. He walked to the other end of the bunk-house and 
turned on the second shaded light. ‘Darker’n’hell in here, 5 
he said. ‘Jesus, how that nigger can pitch shoes. 5 

‘He’s plenty good,’ said Slim. 

‘Damn right he is, 5 said Carlson. ‘He don 5 t give nobody 
else a chance to win ... 5 He stopped and sniffed the air, and 
still sniffing, looked down at the old dog. ‘God Awmighty 
that dog stinks. Get him outa here. Candy 1 I don’t know 
nothing that stinks so bad as an old dog. You gotta get him 
out. 5 

Candy rolled to the edge of his bunk. He reached over 
and patted the ancient dog, and he apologized: ‘I been, 
around him so much I never notice how he stinks. 5 

‘Well, I can’t stand him in here,’ said Carlson. ‘That stink 
hangs around even after he’s gone 5 He walked over with his 
heavy-legged stride and looked down at the dog. ‘Got no 



44 Of Mice and Men 

teeth/ he said* ‘He’s all stiff with rheumatism He ain’t no 
good to you, Gandy. An’ he ain’t no good to himself. 
Why’n’t you shoot him, Candy?’ 

The old man squirmed uncomfortably. ‘Well - hell! I had 
him so long. Had him since he was a pup. I herded sheep 
with him.’ He said proudly ; ‘You wouldn’t think it to look 
at him now, but he was the best damn sheep dog I ever 
seen.’ 

George said. T seen a guy in Weed that had an Airedale 
could herd sheep. Learned it from the other dogs.’ 

Carlson was not to be put off ‘Look, Candy. This ol’ dog 
jus’ suffers hisself all the time If you was to take him out and 
shoot him right m the back of the head’ - he leaned over 
and pointed - ‘right there, why he’d never know what hit 
him ’ 

Candy looked about unhappily. ‘No,’ he said softly. ‘No, 
I couldn’t do that I had ’im too long.’ 

‘He don’t have no fun,’ Carlson insisted. ‘And he stinks 
to beat hell. Tell you what. I’ll shoot him for you. Then it 
won’t be you that does it.’ 

Candy threw his legs off his bunk. He scratched the white 
stubble whiskers on his cheek nervously. ‘I’m so used to 
him,’ he said softly. ‘I had him from a pup ’ 

‘Well, you ain’t bein’ kind to him keepm’ him alive,’ said 
Carlson, ‘Look, Slim’s bitch got a litter right now I bet 
Slim would give you one of them pups to raise up, wouldn’t 
you, Slim?’ 

The skinner had been studying the old dog with his calm 
eyes ‘Yeah,’ he said. ‘You can have a pup if you want to.’ 
He Seemed to shake himself free for speech. ‘Carl’s right. 
Candy That dog ain’t no good to himself. I wisht some- 
body’ d shoot me if I get old an’ a cripple.’ 

Gandy looked helplessly at him, for Slim’s opinions were 
law. ‘Maybe it’d hurt him,’ he suggested. ‘I don’t mind 
takin’ care of him*’ 



Of Alice and Aden 45 

Carlson said: ‘The way Pd shoot him* he wouldn’t feel 
nothing. I’d put the gun right there/ He pointed with his 
toe ‘Right back of the head. He wouldn’t even quiver/ 

Candy looked for help from face to face. It was quite dark 
outside now A young labouring man came in. His sloping 
shoulders were bent forward and he walked heavily on his 
heels, as though he carried the invisible grain bag. He went 
to his bunk and put his hat on his shelf. Then he picked a 
pulp magazine from his shelf and brought it to the light over 
the table. ‘Did I show you this. Slim? 9 he asked. 

‘Show me what? 9 

The young man turned to the back of the magazine, put 
it down on the table and pointed with his finger ‘Right 
there, read that/ Slim bent over it. ‘Go on, 9 said the young 
man ‘Read it out loud/ 

‘ “Dear Editor 99 / Slim read slowly. ‘ “I read your mag for 
six years and I think it is the best on the market. I like 
stories by Peter Rand. I think he is a whing-dmg. Give us 
more like the ‘Dark Rider 9 . I don’t write many letters. Just 
thought I would tell you I think your mag is the best dime’s 
worth I ever spent 99 9 

Slim looked up questiomngly. ‘What you want me to read 
that for? 9 

Whit said: ‘Go on. Read the name at the bottom/ 

Slim read: ‘ “Yours for success, William Tenner 99 9 He 
glanced up at Whit again, ‘What you want me to read that 
for? 9 

Whit closed the magazine impressively. ‘Don’t you re- 
member Bill Tenner? Worked here about three months ago/ 

Slim thought ... ‘Little guy? 9 he asked. ‘Drove a culti- 
vator? 9 

‘That’s him, 9 Whit cried. ‘That’s the guyi 9 

‘You think he’s the guy wrote this letter? 9 

‘I know it. Bill and me was in here one day. Bill had one 
of them books that just come. He was lookin’ in it and he 



46 Of Mice and Men 

says: “I wrote a letter. Wonder if they put it in the book!” 
But it wasn’t there. Bill says- “Maybe they’re savin’ it for 
later.” An’ that’s just what they done. There it is ’ 

"Guess you’re right/ said Slim. "Got it right in the book/ 

George held out his hand for the magazine. "Let’s look at 
it?’ 

Whit found the place again, but he did not surrender his 
hold on it. He pointed out the letter with his forefinger. And 
then he went to his box shelf and laid the magazine care- 
fully in. T wonder if Bill seen it/ he said. "Bill and me 
worked in that patch of field peas. Run cultivators, both of 
us. Bill was a hell of a nice fella.’ 

During the conversation Carlson had refused to be drawn 
in. He continued to look down at the old dog. Gandy 
watched him uneasily. At last Carlson said: "If you want me 
to, I’ll put the old devil out of his misery right now and get 
it over with. Ain’t nothing left for him. Can’t eat, can’t see, 
can’t even walk without hurtin’.’ 

Candy said hopefully: "You ain’t got no gun.’ 

"The hell I ain’t. Got a Luger. It won’t hurt him none at 
all’ 

Candy said: "Maybe to-morra. Le’s wait till to-morra.’ 

"I don’t see no reason for it/ said Carlson. He went to his 
bunk, pulled his bag from underneath it and took out a 
Luger pistol "Le’s get it over with/ he said. "We can’t sleep 
with him stinkin’ around in here.’ He put the pistol in his 
hip pocket. 

Candy looked a long time at Slim to try to find some re- 
versal. And Slim gave him none. At last Candy said softly 
and hopelessly: "Awright — take ’im.’ He did not look down 
at the dog at all. He lay back on his bunk and crossed his 
arms behind his head and stared at the ceiling. 

From his pocket Carlson took a little leather thong. He 
stooped over and tied it around the old dog’s neck. All the 
men except Candy watched him. "Come, boy. Come on, 



Of Mice and Men 47 

boy/ be said gently. And he said apologetically to Candy: 
‘He won’t even feel it/ Candy did not move nor answer him. 
He twitched the thong ‘Come on, boy/ The old dog got 
slowly and stiffly to his feet and followed the gently-pulling 
leash. 

Slim said- ‘Carlson/ 

‘Yeah?’ 

‘You know what to do?’ 

‘What ya mean. Slim? 3 

‘Take a shovel/ said Slim shortly. 

‘Oh, sure! I get you/ He led the dog out into the darkness. 

George followed to the door and shut the door and set the 
latch gently in its place Candy lay rigidly on his bed staring 
at the ceiling. 

Slim said loudly: ‘One of my lead mules got a bad hoof. 
Got to get some tar on it/ His voice trailed off. It was silent 
outside. Carlson’s footsteps died away The silence came into 
the room And the silence lasted. 

George chuckled ‘I bet Lennie’s right out there in the 
barn with his pup. He won’t want to come in here no more 
now he’s got a pup/ 

Slim said: ‘Candy, you can have any one of them pups 
you want/ 

Candy did not answer The silence fell on the room again. 
It came out of the night and invaded the room. George said: 
‘Anybody like to play a little euchre?’ 

‘I’ll play out a few with you/ said Whit. 

They took places opposite each other at the table under 
the light, but George did not shuffle the cards. He rippled 
the edge of the deck nervously, and the little snapping noise 
drew the eyes of all the men in the room, so that he stopped 
doing it. The silence fell on the room again. A minute passed, 
and another minute. Candy lay still, staring at the ceil- 
ing. Slim gazed at him for a moment and then looked down 
at his hands; he subdued one hand with the other, and held 



48 Of Mice and Men 

it down. There came a little gnawing sound from under the 
floor and all the men looked down toward it gratefully. Only 
Candy continued to stare at the ceiling. 

‘Sounds like there was a rat under there/ said George. 
‘We ought to get a trap down there. 3 

Whit broke out: ‘What the helPs takin 3 him so long. Lay 
out some cards, why don’t you? We ain’t going to get no 
euchre played this way. 5 

George brought the cards together tightly and studied the 
backs of them. The silence was in the room again. 

A shot sounded in the distance. The men looked quickly 
at the old man. Every head turned toward him. 

For a moment he continued to stare at the ceiling. Then 
he rolled slowly over and faced the wall and lay silent. 

George shuffled the cards noisily and dealt them. Whit 
drew a scoring board to him and set the pegs to start. Whit 
said: ‘I guess you guys really come here to work 3 

‘How do ya mean? 3 George asked. 

Whit laughed. ‘Well, ya come on a Friday. You got two 
days to work till Sunday. 3 

‘I don’t see how you figure, 3 said George. 

Whit laughed again. ‘You do if you been around these big 
ranches much. Guy that wants to look over a ranch comes 
in Sat 3 day afternoon. He gets Sat 5 day night supper an 3 three 
meals on Sunday, and he can quit Monday mornin 3 after 
breakfast without turning his hand. But you come to work 
Friday noon. You got to put in a day an’ a half no matter 
how you figure. 3 

George looked at him levelly. ‘We’re gonna stick aroun’ 
a while, 3 he said. ‘Me an 3 Lennie’s gonna roll up a stake. 3 

The door opened quietly and the stable buck put in his 
head; a lean negro head, lined with pain, the eye patient. 
‘Mr Slim. 3 

Slim took his eyes from old Gandy ‘Huh? Oh! Hello, 
Crooks. What’s 3 a matter?’ 



Of Alice and Men 49 

‘You told me to warm up tar for that xnule’s foot, I got 
it warm. 9 

‘Oh* Sure, Crooks. I’ll come right out an 9 put it on. 9 

‘I can do it if you want, Mr Slim/ 

‘No. I’ll come do it myself/ He stood up. 

Crooks said: ‘Mr Slim/ 

‘Yeah/ 

‘That big new guy’s messm 5 around your pups out in the 
bam/ 

‘Well, he ain’t doin’ no harm. I give him one of them 
pups/ 

‘Just thought I’d tell ya,’ said Crooks. ‘He’s takm’ ’em 
outa nest and handlin’ them That won’t do them no good/ 

‘He won’t hurt ’em,’ said Slim. ‘I’ll come along with you 
now/ 

George looked up. ‘If that crazy bastard’s foolin’ around 
too much, jus’ kick him out. Slim.’ 

Slim followed the stable buck out of the room. 

George dealt and Whit picked up his cards and examined 
them. ‘Seen the new kid yet?’ he asked 

‘What kid?’ George asked. 

‘Why, Gurley’s new wife/ 

‘Yeah, I see her ’ 

‘Well, ain’t she a looloo?’ 

‘I ain’t seen that much of her,’ said George. 

Whit laid down his cards impressively ‘Well, stick around 
an’ keep your eyes open. You’ll see plenty. She ain’t con- 
cealin’ nothing. I never seen nobody like her. She got the 
eye goin’ all the time on everybody. I bet she even gives 
the stable buck the eye. I don’t know what the hell she 
wants/ 

George asked casually: ‘Been any trouble since she got 
here?’ 

It was obvious that Whit was not interested in his cards. 
He laid his hand down and George scooped it in. George 



50 Of Mice and Men 

laid out his deliberate solitaire hand -seven cards* and six on 
top, and five on top of those. 

Whit said: ‘I see what you mean. No, they ain’t been 
nothing yet. Curley’s got yelia-jackets in his drawers* but 
that’s all so far. Ever’ time the guys is around she shows up. 
She’s lookin’ for Curley, or she thought she lef’ somethin’ 
layin’ around and she’s lookin’ for it. Seems like she can’t 
keep away from guys. An’ Curley’s pants is just crawlin’ 
with ants, but they ain’t nothing come of it yet ’ 

George said: ‘She’s gonna make a mess. They’s gonna be 
a bad mess about her. She’s a jail bait all set on the trigger. 
That Curley got his work cut out for him Ranch with a 
bunch of guys on it ain’t no place for a girl* specially like her.’ 

Whit said: Tf you got idears, you ought to come in town 
with us guys to-morra night.’ 

‘Why? What’s doin’?’ 

‘Jus’ the usual thing. We go in to old Susy’s place Hell of 
a nice place. Old Susy’s a laugh - always crackin’ jokes Like 
she says when we come up on the front porch las’ Sat’day 
night. Susy opens the door and then she yells over her 
shoulder: “Get yor coats on* girls* here comes the sheriff.” 
She never talks dirty* neither. Got five girls there.’ 

‘What’s it set you back?’ George asked. 

‘Two an’ a half. You can get a shot for two bits Susy got 
nice chairs to set m, too. If a guy don’t want a flop, why he 
can just set in the chairs and have a couple or three shots 
and pass the time of day and Susy don’t give a damn. She 
ain’t rushin’ guys through and kickin’ ’em out if they don’t 
want a flop.’ 

‘Might go in and look the joint over,’ said George. 

‘Sure. Come along. It’s a hell of a lot of fun - her crackin’ 
jokes all the time. Like she says one time, she says: “I’ve 
knew people that if they got a rag rug on the floor an’ a 
kewpiedoll lamp on the phonograph* they think they’re run- 
ning a parlour house.” That’s Clara’s house she’s talkin’ 



Of Mice and Men 51 

about. An 5 Susy says: “I know what you boys want,’* she 
says. “My girls is clean/ 9 she says, “an 5 there ain’t no water 
in my whisky,” she says. “If any you guys wanta look at a 
kewpie doll lamp an 9 take your own chance gettin 9 burned, 
why you know where to go.” An 9 she savs. “There’s guys 
around here walkin’ bow-legged ’cause they like to look at a 
kewpie doll lamp.” 9 

George asked. ‘Clara runs the other house, huh?’ 

‘Yeah,’ said Whit. ‘We don’t never go there Clara gets 
three bucks a crack and thirty-five cents a shot, and she don’t 
crack no jokes But Susy’s place is clean and she got nice 
chairs. Don’t let no goo-goos in, neither.’ 

‘Me an’ Lennie’s rollin’ up a stake,’ said George. T might 
go in an’ set and have a shot, but I ain’t puttin’ on no two 
and a half ’ 

‘Well, a guy got to have some fun sometime,’ said Whit. 

The door opened and Lennie and Carlson came in to- 
gether Lennie crept to his bunk and sat down, trying not 
to attract attention. Carlson reached under his bunk and 
brought out his bag. He didn’t look at old Gandy, who still 
faced the wall. Carlson found a little cleaning rod in the bag 
and a can of oil. He laid them on his bed and then brought 
out the pistol, took out the magazine and snapped the 
loaded shell from the chamber. Then he fell to cleaning the- 
barrel with the litde rod. When the ejector snapped. Candy 
turned over and looked for a moment at the gun before he 
turned back to the wall again. 

Carlson said casually: ‘Curley been in yet?’ 

‘No,’ said Whit. ‘What’s eatin’ on Curley?’ 

Carlson squinted down the barrel of his gun. ‘Lookin’ for 
his old lady. I seen him going round and round outside/ 

Whit said sarcastically. ‘He spends half his time lookin’ 
for her, and the rest of the time she’s lookin’ for him.’ 

Curley burst into the room excitedly. ‘Any you guys seen 
my wife?’ he demanded. 



52 Of Mice and Men 

‘She ain’t been here/ said Whit. 

Curley looked threateningly about the room. ‘Where’s the 
hell’s Slim? 9 

4 Went out m the barn/ said George. 4 He was gonna put 
some tar on a split hoof. 9 

Curley’s shoulders dropped and squared. ‘How long ago’d 
he go?’ 

‘Five — ten minutes. 9 

Curley jumped out the door and banged it after him. 

Whit stood up. ‘I guess maybe I 9 d like to see this/ he said. 
‘Curley’s just spoilin’ or he wouldn’t start for Slim. An’ 
Curley’s handy, God damn handy. Got in the finals for the 
Golden Gloves. He got newspaper clippings about it.’ He 
considered. ‘But jus 9 the same, he better leave Slim alone 
Nobody knows what Slim can do. 9 

‘Thinks Slim’s with his wife, don’t he?’ said George. 

‘Looks like it/ Whit said. 4 ’Course Slim ain’t. Least I 
don’t think Slim is. But I like to see the fuss if it comes off 
Come on, let’s go ’ 

George said: ‘I’m stayin’ right here. I don’t want to get 
mixed up in nothing. Lennie and me got to make a stake.’ 

Carlson finished the cleaning of the gun and put it m the 
bag and pushed the bag under his bunk ‘I guess I’ll go our 
and look her over/ he said. Old Gandy lay still, and Lenme, 
from his bunk, watched George cautiously. 

When Whit and Carlson were gone and the door closed 
after them, George turned to Lenme. ‘What you got on 
your mind?’ 

‘I ain’t done nothing, George. Slim says I better not pet 
them pups so much for a while. Slim says it ain’t good for 
them; so I come right m. I been good, George.’ 

‘I coulda told you that,’ said George. 

‘Well, I wasn’t hurtm’ ’em none. I jus’ had mine in my 
lap pettin’ it.’ 

George asked: ‘Did you see Slim out in the barn?’ 



Of Mice and Men 53 

‘Sure I did. He toP me I better not pet that pup no 
more. 5 

‘Did you see that girl? 5 

‘You mean Gurley’s girl? 5 

‘Yeah Did she come in the barn? 5 

‘No. Anyways I never seen her 5 

‘You never seen Slim talkin’ to her? 5 

‘Uh-uh. She ain’t been m the barn 5 

‘O K../ said George. ‘I guess them guys ain’t gonna see no 
fight. If there’s any fightm’, Lennie, you keep out of it.’ 

‘I don’t want no fights/ said Lennie. He got up from his 
bunk and sat down at the table, across from George. Al- 
most automatically George shuffled the cards and laid out 
his solitaire hand. He used a deliberate, thoughtful slow- 
ness. 

Lenme reached for a face card and studied it, then turned 
it upside down and studied it. ‘Both ends the same,’ he said. 
‘George, why is it both end’s the same?’ 

‘I don’t know/ said George. ‘That’s jus’ the way they 
make ’em What was Slim doin’ m the barn when you seen 
him?’ 

‘Slim?’ 

‘Sure You seen him in the barn, an’ he tol’ you not to pet 
the pups so much.’ 

‘Oh, yeah. He had a can a’ tar an’ a paint brush I don’t 
know what for/ 

‘You sure that girl didn’t come in like she come in here 
to-day?’ 

‘No. She never come.’ 

George sighed. ‘You give me a good whore-house evefy 
time/ he said. ‘A guy can go in an’ get drunk and get 
ever’thing outa his system all at once, an’ no messes. And 
he knows how much it’s gonna set him back. These here jail 
baits is just set on the trigger of the hoosegow.’ 

Lennie followed his words admiringly, and moved his lips 



54 Of Mice and Men 

a little to keep up. George continued : ‘You remember Andy 
Cushman, Lennie? Went to grammar school?" 

‘The one that his old lady used to make hot cakes for the 
kids?" Lennie asked. 

‘Yeah. That’s the one. You can remember anything if 
there’s anything to eat m it ’ George looked carefully at the 
solitaire hand. He put an ace up on his scoring rack and 
piled a two, three and four of diamonds on it. ‘Andy’s in San 
Quentin right now on account of a tart,’ said George. 

Lennie drummed on the table with his fingers. ‘George?’ 

‘Huh?’ 

‘George, how long’s it gonna be till we get that little place 
an’ live on the fatta the lan’ - an’ rabbits?’ 

‘I don’t know,’ said George. ‘We gotta get a big stake to- 
gether. I know a little place we can get cheap, but they ain’t 
givin’ it away.’ 

Old Candy turned slowly over His eyes were wide open. 
He watched George carefully. 

Lennie said. ‘Tell about that place, George.’ 

‘I jus’ tol* you, jus’ las’ night.’ 

‘Go on — tell again, George.’ 

‘Well, it’s ten acres,’ said George. ‘Got a little win’mill. 
Got a little shack on it, an’ a chicken run. Got a kitchen, 
orchard, cherries, apples, peaches, ’cots, nuts, got a few 
berries. They’s a place for alfalfa and plenty water to flood 
it. They’s a pigpen. ’ 

‘An’ rabbits, George.’ 

‘No place for rabbits now, but I could easy build a few 
hutches and you could feed alfalfa to the rabbits.’ 

‘Damn nght, I could/ said Lennie. ‘You God damn right 
I could ’ 

George’s hands stopped working with the cards. His voice 
was growing warmer. ‘An’ we could have a few pigs. I 
could build a smoke-house like the one gran’pa had, an’ 
when we kill a pig we can smoke the bacon and the hams. 



Of Mice and Men 55 

and make sausage an 5 all like that. An* when the salmon 
run up river we could catch a hundred of ’em a n’ salt ’em 
down or smoke ’em. We could have them for breakfast. 
They ain’t nothing so nice as smoked salmon. When the 
fruit come in we could can it - and tomatoes, they’re easy 
to can. Ever’ Sunday we’d kill a chicken or a rabbit. Maybe, 
we’d have a cow or a goat, and the cream is so God damn 
thick you got to cut it with a knife and take it out with a 
spoon.’ 

Lennie watched him with wide eyes, and old Candy 
watched him too. Lennie said softly: ‘We could live offa the 
fatta the lan’.’ 

"Sure/ said George. "All kin’s a vegetables in the garden, 
and if we want a little whisky we can sell a few eggs or 
something, or some milk. We’d jus’ live there. We’d be- 
long there. There wouldn’t be no more runmn 5 round the 
country and gettm’ fed by a Jap cook. No, sir, we’d have 
our own place where we belonged and not sleep in no bunk- 
house.’ 

"Tell about the house, George,’ Lennie begged. 

"Sure, we’d have a little house an’ a room to ourself. Little 
fat iron stove, an’ m the winter we’d keep a fire goin’ in it. 
It ain’t enough land so we’d have to work too hard. Maybe 
six, seven hours a day. We wouldn’t have to buck no barley 
eleven hours a day. An’ when we put in a crop, why, we’d 
be there to take the crop up. We’d know what come of our 
planting.’ 

‘An’ rabbits,’ Lennie said eagerly. "An’ I’d take care of 
’em. Tell how I’d do that, George.’ 

"Sure, you’d go out in the alfalfa patch an’ you’d have a 
sack. You’d fill up the sack and bring it in an’ put in the 
rabbit cages.’ 

They’d mbble an’ they’d nibble,’ said Lennie, "the way 
they do. I seen em.’ 

‘Ever’ six weeks or so/ George continued, "them does 



56 Of Mice and Men 

would throw a litter, so we’d have plenty rabbits to eat an 5 
to sell. An’ we’d keep a few pigeons to go fiyin’ around the 
win’mill like they done when I was a kid. 9 He looked raptly 
at the wall over Lennie’s head. ‘An’ it’d be our own, an 5 
nobody could can us If we don’t like a guy we can say: 
“Get the hell out,” and by God he’s got to do it. An’ if a 
fren’ come along, why we’d have an extra bunk, an’ we’d 
say: “Why don’t you spen’ the night,” an’ by God he would 
We’d have a setter dog and a couple stripe cats, but you 
gotta watch out them cats don’t get the little rabbits.’ 

Lenme breathed hard. ‘You jus’ let ’em try to get the rab- 
bits. I’ll break their God damn necks I’ll .. I’ll smash ’em 
with a stick.’ He subsided, grumbling to himself, threaten- 
ing the future cats which might dare to disturb the future 
rabbits. 

George sat entranced with his own picture. 

When Gandy spoke they both jumped as though they had 
been caught doing something reprehensible. Candy said 
‘You know where’s a place like that?’ 

George was on guard immediately. ‘S’pose I do,’ he said 
‘What’s that to you?’ 

‘You don’t need to tell me where it’s at. Might be any 
place.’ 

‘Sure,’ said George. ‘That’s right You couldn’t find it in 
a hundred years.’ 

Gandy went on excitedly: ‘How much they want for a 
place like that?’ 

George watched him suspiciously. ‘Well — I could get it 
for six hundred bucks. The ol’ people that owns it is flat bust 
an’ the ol’ lady needs an operation. Say - what’s it to you?, 
You got nothing to do with us.’ 

Gandy said: ‘I ain’t much good with o’ny one hand I lost 
my hand right here on this ranch. That’s why they give me 
a job swampin’. An’ they give me two hundred an’ fifty dol- 
lars ’cause I los* my hand. An’ I got fifty more saved up 



Of Mice and Men 57 

right in the bank, right now. Tha’s three hundred, and I got 
fifty more cornin’ the enda the month. Tell you what 
He leaned forward eagerly. ‘S’pose I went in with you guys. 
Tha’s three hunderd an’ fifty bucks I’d put in. I ain’t much 
good, but I could cook and tend the chickens and hoe the 
garden some. How’d that be?’ 

George half-closed his eyes T gotta think about that. We 
was always gonna do it by ourselves. 5 

Gandy interrupted him. T 5 d make a will an 5 leave my 
share to you guys in case I kick off, 5 cause I ain’t got no 
relatives nor nothing. You guys got any money? Maybe we 
could do her right now? 5 

George spat on the floor disgustedly. ‘We got ten bucks 
between us. 5 Then he said thoughtfully: Took, if me an’ 
Lennie work a month an 5 don’t spen 5 nothing, we 5 ll have a 
hundred bucks. That’d be four fifty. I bet we could swing 
her for that. Then you an 5 Lennie could go get her started 
an 5 1 5 d get a job an 5 make up the res’, an 5 you could sell eggs 
an 5 stuff like that. 5 

They fell into a silence. They looked at one another, 
amazed. This thing they had never really believed in was 
coming true. George said reverently: "Jesus Christ! I bet we 
could swing her. 5 His eyes were full of wonder. "I bet we 
could swing her, 5 he repeated softly. 

Candy sat on the edge of his bunk. He scratched the stump 
of his wrist nervously. "I got hurt four year ago, 5 he said. 
‘They’ll can me purty soon. Jus 5 as soon as I can’t swamp 
out no bunk-houses they’ll put me on the county. Maybe if 
I give you guys my money, you’ll let me hoe in the garden 
even after I ain’t no good at it. An 5 I’ll wash dishes an 5 little 
chicken stuff like that But I’ll be on our own place, an 5 I’ll 
be let to work on our own place. 5 He said miserably: ‘You 
seen what they done to my dog to-night? They says he 
wasn’t no good to himself nor nobody else. When they can 
me here I wisht somebody’d shoot me. But they won’t do 



58 Of Mice and Men 

nothing like that. I won’t have no place to go, an’ I can’t 
get no more jobs. I’ll have thirty dollars more comm’, time 
you guys is ready to quit.’ 

George stood up. ‘We’ll do her,’ he said. ‘We’ll fix up that 
little old place an’ we’ll go live there.’ He sat down again. 
They all sat still, all bemused by the beauty of the thing, 
each mind was popped into the future when this lovely 
thing should come about. 

George said wanderingly: ‘S’pose they was a carnival or 
a circus come to town, or a ball game, or any damn thing.’ 
Old Candy nodded in appreciation of the idea, ‘We’d just 
go to her,’ George said ‘We wouldn’t ask nobody if we 
could. Jus’ say: “We’ll go to her,” an’ we would. Jus’ milk 
the cow and sling some grain to the chickens an’ go to her.’ 

‘An’ put some grass to the rabbits,’ Lenme broke in. ‘I 
wouldn’t never forget to feed them. When we gon’ta do it, 
George?’ 

‘In one month. Right squack m one month Know what 
I’m gon’ta do, I’m gon’ta write to them old people that 
owns the place that we’ll take it An’ Candy’ll send a hun- 
derd dollars to bind her.’ 

‘Sure will,’ said Candy. ‘They got a good stove there?’ 

‘Sure, got a nice stove, bums coal or wood.’ 

‘I’m gonna take my pup,’ said Lennie. ‘I bet by Christ 
he likes it there, by Jesus.’ 

Voices were approaching from outside. George said 
quickly: ‘Don’t tell nobody about it. Jus’ us three an’ no- 
body else. They li’ble to can us we can’t make no stake. Jus’ 
go on like we was gonna buck barley the rest of our lives, 
then all of a sudden some day we’ll go get our pay an’ scram 
outa here/ 

Lennie and Candy nodded, and they were grinning with 
delight. ‘Don’t tell nobody,’ Lennie said to himself. 

Candy said: ‘George/ 

‘Huh?’ 



Of Mice and Men 59 

T ought to of shot that dog myself, George. I shouldn’t 
ought to of let no stranger shoot my dog.’ 

The door opened. Slim came in, followed by Gurley and 
Carlson and Whit. Slim’s hands were black with tar and he 
was scowling. Curley hung close to his elbow. 

Curley said: ‘Well, I didn’t mean nothing, Slim. I just ast 
you.’ 

Slim said: ‘Well, you been askin’ me too often. I’m gettin’ 
God damn sick of it. If you can’t look after your own God 
damn wife, what you expect me to do about it? You lay 
offa me.’ 

T’m jus’ tryin’ to tell you I didn’t mean nothing,’ said 
Gurley T jus’ thought you might of saw her.’ 

‘Why’n’t you tell her to stay the hell home where she 
belongs?’ said Carlson. ‘You let her hang around bunk- 
houses and pretty soon you’re gonna have som’pin on your 
hands and you won’t be able to do nothing about it.’ 

Gurley whirled on Carlson. ‘You keep outa this les’ you 
wanta step outside.’ 

Carlson laughed. ‘You God damn punk,’ he said. ‘You 
tried to throw a scare into Slim, an’ you couldn’t make it 
stick. Slim throwed a scare into you. You’re yella as a frog 
belly. I don’t care if you’re the best welter in the country. 
You come for me, an’ I’ll kick your God damn head off.’ 

Gandy joined the attack with joy. ‘Glove fulla vaseline,’ 
he said disgustedly. Gurley glared at him. His eyes slipped 
on past and lighted on Lennie; and Lennie was still smiling 
with delight at the memory of the ranch. 

Gurley stepped ov s er to Lennie like a terrier. ‘What the 
hell you laughin’ at?’ 

Lennie looked blankly at him. ‘Huh?’ 

Then Curley’s rage exploded. ‘Come on, ya big bastard. 
Get up on your feet. No big son-of-a-bitch is gonna laugh at 
me. I’ll show ya who’s yella.’ 

Lenme looked helplessly at George, and then he got up 



6o 


Of Mice and Men 

and tried to retreat. Curley was balanced and poised He 
slashed at Lennie with his left, and then smashed down his 
nose with a right. Lennie gave a cry of terror. Blood welled 
from his nose. ‘George, 9 he cried. ‘Make s um let me alone, 
George. 9 He backed until he was against the wall, and Cur- 
ley followed, slugging him in the face. Lennie 9 s hands re- 
mained at his sides; he was too frightened to defend himself. 

George was on his feet yelling: ‘Get him, Lennie. Don’t 
let him do it. 9 

Lennie covered his face with his huge paws and bleated 
with terror He cried: ‘Make ’urn stop, George 9 Then Cur- 
ley attacked his stomach and cut off his wind. 

Slim jumped up. ‘The dirty little rat, 3 he cried, T 9 11 get 
’urn myself. 9 

George put out his hand and grabbed Slim ‘Wait a 
minute, 9 he shouted. He cupped his hands around his mouth 
and yelled: ‘Get 9 im, Lennie! 9 

Lennie took his hands away from his face and looked 
about for George, and Curley slashed at his eyes. The big 
face was covered with blood. George yelled again: ‘I said 
get him. 9 

Curley’s fist was swinging when Lennie reached for it. 
The next minute Curley was flopping like a fish on a line, 
and his closed fist was lost in Lennie’s big hand. George ran 
down the room. ‘Leggo of him, Lennie. Let go 9 

But Lennie watched in terror the flopping little man whom 
he held. Blood ran down Lennie’s face, one of his eyes was 
cut and closed. George slapped him on the face again and 
again, and still Lennie held on to the closed fist. Curley was 
white and shrunken by now, and his struggling had become 
weak. He stood crying, his fist lost in Lennie’s paw 

George shouted over and over: ‘Leggo his hand, Lennie. 
Leggo. Slim, come help me while the guy got any hand left. 9 

Suddenly Lennie let go his hold. He crouched cowering 
against the wall. ‘You tol 9 me to, George, 9 he said miserably. 



Of Mice and Men 6 1 

Curley sat down on the floor, looking in wonder at his 
crushed hand. Slim and Carlson bent over him Then Slim 
straightened up and regarded Lennxe with horror. ‘We got 
to get him m to a doctor/ he said ‘Looks to me like ever 9 
bone in his han 5 is bust. 9 

T didn’t wanta/ Lennie cried. ‘I didn’t wanta hurt him. 9 

Slim said* ‘Carlson, you get the candy wagon hitched up. 
We’ll take urn 5 into Soledad an 5 get 5 um fixed up. 5 Carlson 
hurried out. Slim turned to the whimpering Lennie. ‘It ain’t 
your fault/ he said. ‘This punk sure had it cornin’ to him. 
But - Jesus * He ain’t hardly got no han’ left. 5 Slim hurried 
out, and in a moment returned with a tin cup of water. He 
held it to Curley’s lips 

George said* ‘Slim, will we get canned now? We need the 
stake. Will Curley’s old man can us now? 5 

Slim smiled wryly. He knelt down beside Curley. ‘You 
got your senses m hand enough to listen?’ he asked. Curley 
nodded. ‘Well then listen/ Slim went on. ‘I think you got 
your han’ caught in a machine. If you don’t tell nobody 
what happened, we ain’t going to. But you jus 5 tell an 5 try 
to get this guy canned and we’ll tell ever’body, an 5 then will 
you get the laugh. 5 

‘I won’t tell, 5 said Curley. He avoided looking at Lennie. 

Buggy wheels sounded outside. Slim helped Curley up. 
‘Come on now. Carlson’s gonna take you to a doctor. 5 He 
helped Curley out the door. The sound of wheels drew away. 
In a moment Slim came back into the bunk-house. He 
looked at Lennie, still crouched fearfully against the wall. 
‘Let’s see your hands/ he asked. 

Lennie stuck out his hands. 

‘Christ awmighty, I hate to have you mad at me/ Slim 
said. 

George broke in: ‘Lennie was jus 5 scairt/ he explained. 
‘He didn’t know what to do. I told you nobody ought never 
to fight him. No, I guess it was Candy I told/ 



62 


Of Mice and Men 

Gandy nodded solemnly. ‘That’s jus’ what you done/ he 
said. ‘Right this morning when Curley first lit mtil your 
fren’, you says “He better not fool with Lenme if he knows 
what good for ’um.” That’s jus’ what you says to me.’ 

George turned to Lennie. ‘It ain’t your fault/ he said. 
‘You don’t need to be scairt no more. You done jus’ what 
I tor you to. Maybe you better go in the washroom an’ clean 
up your face. You look like hell.’ 

Lennie smiled with his bruised mouth. ‘I didn’t want no 
trouble/ he said. He walked toward the door, but just be- 
fore he came to it he turned back. ‘George?’ 

‘What you want?’ 

‘I can still tend the rabbits, George?’ 

‘Sure. You ain’t done nothing wrong * 

‘I didn’t mean no harm, George.’ 

‘Well, get the hell out and wash your face.’ 

★ 

Crooks, the negro stable buck, had his bunk in the harness- 
room; a little shed that leaned off the wall of the barn. On 
one side of the little room there was a square four-paned 
window, and on the other, a narrow plank door leading 
into the barn. Crook’s bunk was a long box filled with straw, 
on which his blankets were flung. On the wall by the win- 
dow there were pegs on which hung broken harness in 
process of being mended, strips of new leather; and under 
the window itself a little bench for leather-working tools, 
curved knives and needles and balls of linen thread, and a 
small hand riveter. On pegs were also pieces of harness, a 
split collar with the horsehair stuffing sticking out, a broken 
hame, and a trace chain with its leather covering split. 
Crooks had his apple-box over his bunk, and in it a range 
of medicine bottles, both for himself and for the horses. 
There were cans of saddle soap and a drippy can of tar with 
its paint-brush sticking over the edge. And scattered about 



Of Mice and Men 63 

the floor were a number of personal possessions; for, being 
alone, Crooks could leave his things about, and being a 
stable buck and a cripple, he was more permanent than the 
other men, and he had accumulated more possessions than 
he could carry on his back. 

Crooks possessed several pairs of shoes, a pair of rubber 
boots, a big alarm clock and a single-barrelled shot-gun. 
And he had books, too; a tattered dictionary and a mauled 
copy of the California civil code for 1905. There were bat- 
tered magazines and a few dirty books on a special shelf over 
his bunk. A pair of large gold-rimmed spectacles hung from 
a nail on the wall above his bed. 

This room was swept and fairly neat, for Crooks was a 
proud, aloof man. He kept his distance and demanded that 
other people keep theirs His body was bent over to the left 
by his crooked spme, and his eyes lay deep m his head, and 
because of their depth seemed to glitter with intensity. His 
lean face was lined with deep black wrinkles, and he had 
thin, pam-tightened lips which were lighter than his face. 

It was Saturday night. Through the open door that led into 
the barn came the sound of moving horses, of feet stirring, of 
teeth champing on hay, of the rattle of halter chains. In the 
stable buck’s room a small electric globe threw a meagre 
yellow light. 

Crooks sat on his bunk. His shirt was out of his jeans at 
the back. In one hand he held a bottle of liniment, with 
the other he rubbed his spine. Now and then he poured a 
few drops of the liniment into his pink-palmed hand and 
reached up under his shirt to rub agam. He flexed his 
muscles against his back and shivered. 

Noiselessly, Lennie appeared in the open doorway and 
stood there looking in, his big shoulders nearly filling the 
opening. For a moment Crooks did not see him, but on rais- 
ing his eyes he stiffened and a scowl came on his face. His 
hands came out from under his shirt. 



64 Of Mice and Men 

Lennie smiled helplessly in an attempt to make friends* 

Crooks said sharply: ‘You got no right to come in my 
room* This here’s my room. Nobody got any right in here 
but me*’ 

Lennie gulped and his smile grew more fawning. T ain’t 
doing nothing,’ he said. ‘Just come to look at my puppy. 
And I seen your light,’ he explained. 

‘Well, I got a right to have a light. You go on get outa my 
room. I ain’t wanted in the bunk-house, and you ain’t 
wanted in my room.’ 

‘Why ain’t you wanted?’ Lenrne asked. 

4 ’Cause I’m black They play cards in there, but I can’t 
play because I’m black. They say I stink. Well, I tell you, 
you all of you stink to me.’ 

Lennie flapped his big hands helplessly. ‘Ever’body went 
into town,’ he said. ‘Slim an’ George an’ ever’body. George 
says I gotta stay here an’ not get in no trouble. I seen your 
light.’ 

‘Well, what do you want?’ 

‘Nothing - I seen your light. I thought I could jus’ come 
in an’ set.’ 

Crooks stared at Lennie, and he reached behind him and 
took down the spectacles and adjusted them over his pink 
ears and stared again. ‘I don’t know what you’re doin’ in 
the barn anyway,’ he complained ‘You ain’t no skinner. 
They’s no call for a bucker to come into the barn at all. 
You ain’t no skinner. You ain’t got nothing to do with the 
horses.’ 

‘The pup,’ Lenme repeated. ‘I come to see my pup.’ 

‘Well, go see your pup, then. Don’t come in a place 
where you’re not wanted.’ 

Lennie lost his smile. He advanced a step into the 
room, then remembered and backed to the door again. ‘I 
looked at ’em a little. Slim says I ain’t to pet ’em very 
much.’ 



Of Mice and Men 65 

Crooks said ‘Well, you been takin 5 ’em out of the nest 
all the time. I wonder the old lady don’t move ’em some- 
place else. 5 

6 Gh, she don’t care She lets me. 5 Lenme had moved into 
the room again 

Grooks scowled, but Lennie’s disarming smile defeated 
him. ‘Come on in and set a while, 5 Crooks said. ‘ ’Long as 
you won’t get out and leave me alone, you might as well set 
down 5 His tone was a little more friendly. ‘All the boys gone 
into town, huh? 5 

‘All but old Candy. He just sets in the bunk-house shar- 
pening his pencil and sharpening and figuring. 5 

Crooks adjusted his glasses ‘Figuring? What’s Candy 
figuring about? 5 

Lennie almost shouted: * ’Bout the rabbits 5 

‘You’re nuts, 5 said Crooks. ‘You’re crazy as a wedge. 
What rabbits you talkin’ about?’ 

‘The rabbits we’re gonna get, and I get to tend ’em, cut 
grass an’ give ’em water, an 5 like that. 5 

‘Jus’ nuts,’ said Crooks. ‘I don’t blame the guy you travel 
with for keepin’ you outa sight.’ 

Lennie said quietly: ‘It ain’t no lie. We’re gonna do it. 
Gonna get a little place an’ live on the fatta the lan 5 . 5 

Crooks settled himself more comfortably on his bunk. ‘Set 
down, 5 he invited. ‘Set down on the nail-keg. 5 

Lennie hunched down on the little barrel. ‘You think it’s 
a lie, 5 Lennie said, ‘but it ain’t no lie. Ever’ word’s the truth, 
an 5 you can ast George. 5 

Grooks put his dark chin into his pink palm. ‘You travel 
aroun’ with George, don’t ya? 5 

‘Sure. Me an 5 him goes ever 5 place together. 5 

Grooks continued. ‘Sometimes he talks, and you don*t 
know what the hell he’s talkin’ about. Ain’t that so? 5 He 
leaned forward, boring Lennie with his deep eyes. ‘Ain’t? 
that so? 5 



66 Of Mice and Men 

‘Yeah . * sometimes/ 

‘Jus’ talks on, an’ you don’t know what the hell it’s all 
about?’ 

‘Yeah ... sometimes. But ... not always ’ 

Crooks leaned forward over the edge of the bunk. ‘I ain’t, 
a southern negro,’ he said ‘I was born right here in Cali- 
fornia. My old man had a chicken ranch, ’bout ten acres. 
The white kids come to play at our place, an’ sometimes I 
went to play with them, and some of them was pretty nice. 
My ol’ man didn’t like that I never knew till long later why 
he didn’t like that. But I know now.’ He hesitated, and 
when he spoke again his voice was softer ‘There wasfr’t 
another coloured family for miles around. And now there 
ain’t a coloured man on this ranch an’ there’s jus’ one family 
m Solcdad.’ He laughed Tf I say something, why it’s just 
a nigger saying it ’ 

Lennie asked* ‘How long you think it’ll be before thenr 
pups will bo old enough to pet?’ 

Crooks laughed again. ‘A guy can talk to you an’ be sure 
you won’t go blabbm’ Couple of weeks’ an’ them pups’ll 
be all right George knows what he’s about. Jus’ talks, an’ 
you don’t understand nothing ’ He leaned forward ex- 
citedly. ‘This is just a nigger talkin’, an’ a busted-back nig- 
ger. So it don’t mean nothing, see? You couldn’t remember 
it anyways. I seen it over an’ over an’ over — a guy talkin’ 
to another guy and it don’t make no difference if he don’t 
hear or understand. The thing is, they’re talkin’, or they’re 
settin’ still not talkin’. It don’t make no difference, no dif- 
ference.’ His excitement had increased until he pounded his 
knee with his hand. ‘George can tell you screwy things, and 
it don’t matter. It’s just the talking. It’s just bein’ with 
another guy. That’s all.’ He paused. 

His voice grew soft and persuasive. ‘S’pose George don’t 
tome back no more, S’pose he took a powder and just ain’t 
coming back. What’ll you do then?’ 



Of Mice and Men 67 

Lennie’s attention came gradually to what had been said. 
‘What? 3 he demanded 

‘I said s 5 pose George went into town to-night and you 
never heard of him no more. 3 Crooks pressed forward some 
kind of private victory ‘Just s’pose that/ he repeated. 

‘He won’t do it/ Lenme cried. ‘George wouldn’t do noth- 
ing hke that. I been with George a long time. He’ll come 
back to-night . / But the doubt was too much for him. 
‘Don’t you think he will? 3 

Crooks face lighted with pleasure in his torture. ‘Nobody 
can’t tell what a guy’ll do/ he observed calmly. ‘Le’s say 
he wants to come back and can’t. S’pose he gets killed or 
hurt so he can’t come back.’ 

Lenme struggled to understand. ‘George won’t do noth- 
ing like that/ he repeated. ‘George is careful. He won’t get 
hurt. He ain’t never been hurt, ’cause he’s careful.’ 

‘Well, s’pose, jus’ s’pose he don’t come back. What’ll you 
do then?’ 

Lennie’s face wrinkled with apprehension. ‘I don’ know. 
Say, what you doin’ anyways?’ he cried. ‘This ain’t true. 
George ain’t got hurt ’ 

Crooks bored in on him. ‘Want me ta tell ya what’ll hap- 
pen? They’ll take ya to the booby hatch. They’ll tie ya up 
with a collar, like a dog.’ 

Suddenly Lennie’s eyes centred and grew quiet and mad. 
He stood up and walked dangerously toward Crooks. ‘Who 
hurt George?’ he demanded. 

Crooks saw the danger as it approached him. He edged 
back on his bunk to get out of the way. ‘I was just supposin’,’ 
he said. ‘George ain’t hurt. He’s all right. He’ll be back all 
right.’ 

Lennie stood over him. ‘What you supposin’ for? Ain’t no- 
body goin’ to suppose no hurt to George.’ 

Crooks removed his glasses and wiped his eyes with his 
fingers. Jus’ set down/ he said. ‘George ain’t hurt.’ 



68 Of Mice and Men 

Lennie growled back to his seat on the nail-keg. ‘Ain’t 
nobody gom’ to talk no hurt to George/ he grumbled. 

Crooks said gently: ‘Maybe you can see now. You got 
George. You know he’s gom’ to come back. S’pose you didn’t 
have nobody. S’pose you couldn’t go into the bunk-house 
and play rummy ’cause you was black. How’d you like that? 
S’pose you had to sit out here an 5 read books. Sure you 
could play horseshoes till it got dark, but then you got to 
read books. Books ain’t no good. A guy needs somebody - to 
be near him.’ He whined: ‘A guy goes nuts if he ain’t got 
nobody Don’t make no difference who the guy is, long’s he’s 
with you. I tell ya/ he cried, ‘I tell ya a guy gets too lonely 
an’ he gets sick ’ 

‘George gonna come back/ Lennie reassured himself m 
a frightened voice. ‘Maybe George come back already. 
Maybe I better go see.’ 

Crooks said: ‘I didn’t mean to scare you. He’ll come back. 
I was talkin’ about myself. A guy sets alone out here at 
night, maybe readin’ books or thmkin’ or stuff like that. 
Sometimes he gets thinkm’, an’ he got nothing to tell him 
what’s so an’ what ain’t so. Maybe if he sees somethin’, he 
don’t know whether it’s right or not. He can’t turn to some 
other guy and ast him if he sees it too. He can’t tell He 
got nothing to measure by. I seen things out here. I wasn’t 
drunk. I don’t know if I was asleep. If some guy was with 
me, he could tell me I was asleep, an’ then it would be all 
right. But I jus’ don’t know.’ Crooks was looking across the 
room now, looking toward the window. 

Lennie said miserably: ‘George wun’t go away and leave 
me. I know George wun’t do that.’ 

The stable buck went on dreamily: ‘I remember when I 
was a little kid on my old man’s chicken ranch. Had two 
brothers. They was always near me, always there. Used to 
sleep right m the same room, right in the same bed - all 
three. Had a strawberry patch. Had an alfalfa patch. Used 



Of Mice and Men 69 

to turn the chickens out in the alfalfa on a sunny morning. 
My brothers’d set on a fence rail an J watch ’em - white 
chickens they was 5 

Gradually Lennie’s interest came around to what was 
being said ‘George says we’re gonna have alfalfa for the 
rabbits * 

‘What rabbits? 5 

‘We’re gonna have rabbits an 5 a berry patch. 5 

‘You’re nuts.’ 

‘We are too. You ast George ’ 

‘You’re nuts 5 Crooks was scornful. ‘I seen hunderds of 
men come by on the road an’ on the ranches with their 
bindles on their back an’ that same damn thing in their 
heads Hunderds of them They come, an’ they quit an’ go 
on; an’ every damn one of ’em’s got a little piece of land in 
his head. An’ never a God damn one of ’em ever gets it. Just 
like heaven. Ever’body wants a little piece of lan’. I read 
plenty of books out here. Nobody never gets to heaven, and 
nobody never gets no land. It’s just in their head They’re 
all the time talkin’ about it, but it’s jus’ m their head ’ He 
paused and looked toward the open door, for the horses 
were moving restlessly and the halter chains clinked A horse 
whinnied. ‘I guess somebody’s out there,’ Crooks said. ‘May- 
be Slim. Slim comes in sometimes two, three times a night. 
Slim’s a real skinner. He looks out for his team.’ He pulled 
himself painfully upright and moved toward the door. 
‘That you, Slim?’ he called 

Candy’s voice answered. ‘Slim went in town. Say, you 
seen Lenme?’ 

‘Ya mean the big guy?’ 

‘Yeah. Seen him around any place?’ 

‘He’s in here,’ Crooks said shortly. He went back to his 
bunk and lay down* 

Candy stood m the doorway scratching his bald wrist and 
looking blindly into the lighted room He made no attempt 



70 Of Mice and Men 

to enter. ‘Tell ya what, Lennie. I been figuring out about 
them rabbits.’ 

Crooks said irritably: ‘You can come m if you want.’ 

Candy seemed embarrassed. ‘I do 5 know. ’Course, if ya 
want me to ’ 

‘Come on in If ever 5 body’s cornin’ m, you might just as 
well.’ It was difficult for Crooks to conceal his pleasure with 
anger. 

Candy came in, but he was still embarrassed. ‘You got 
a nice cosy little place in here,’ he said to Crooks ‘Must be, 
nice to have a room all to yourself this way.’ 

‘Sure,’ said Crooks ‘And a manure pile under the win- 
dow. Sure it’s swell ’ 

Lennie broke in: ‘You said about them rabbits.’ 

Candy leaned against the wall beside the broken collar 
while he scratched the wrist stump ‘I been here a long 
time/ he said ‘An’ Crooks been here a long time. This’s the 
first time I ever been in his room.’ 

Crooks said darkly ‘Guys don’t come into a coloured 
man’s room very much. Nobody been here but Slim Slim 
an’ the boss.’ 

Candy quickly changed the subject. ‘Slim’s as good a skin- 
ner as I ever seen 5 

Lennie leaned toward the old swamper. ‘About them rab- 
bits/ he insisted. 

Candy smiled. ‘I got it figured out. We can make some 
money on them rabbits if we go about it right.’ 

‘But I get to tend ’em/ Lenme broke m. ‘George says I 
get to tend ’em. He promised ’ 

Crooks interrupted brutally. ‘You guys is just kiddm’ 
yourself You’ll talk about it a hell of a lot, but you won’t 
get no land. You’ll be a swamper here till they take you out 
in a box Hell, I seen too many guys. Lennie here’ll quit an’ 
be on the road in two, three weeks. Seems like ever’ guy got 
land in his head.’ 



Of Mice and Men yi 

Candy rubbed his cheek angrily ‘You God damn right 
we’re gonna do it. George says we are. We got the money 
right now . 9 

‘Yeah ? 9 said Crooks ‘An 9 where 5 s George now? In town 
in a whore-house. That’s where your money’s goin 5 . Jesus, 
I seen it happen too many times. I seen too many guys with 
land in their head They never get none under their hand . 9 

Candy cried: ‘Sure they all want it. Everybody wants a 
little bit of land, not much. Jus 9 somethin 9 that was his. 
Somethin 9 he could live on and there couldn’t nobody throw 
him off of it. I never had none. I planted crops for damn 
near ever’body in this state, but they wasn’t my crops, and 
when I harvested ’em, it wasn’t none of my harvest But we 
gonna do it now, and don’t you make no mistake about that. 
George ain’t got the money in town That money’s m the 
bank. Me an 9 Lennie an 9 George We gonna have a room to 
ourselves We’re gonna have a dog an’ rabbits an chickens. 
We’re gonna have green corn an 9 maybe a cow or a goat . 9 
He stopped, overwhelmed with his picture 

Crooks asked: ‘You say you got the money ? 9 

‘Damn right. We got most of it. Just a little bit more to 
get. Have it all m one month. George got the land all picked 
out, too . 9 

Crooks reached around and explored his spine with his 
hand ‘I never seen a guy really do it , 9 he said. ‘I seen guys 
nearly crazy with loneliness for land, but ever 9 time a whore- 
house or a blackjack game took what it takes . 9 He hesitated. 

If you . guys would want a hand to work for nothing — 
just his keep, why I’d come an’ lend a hand. I ain’t so crip- 
pled I can’t work like a son-of-a-bitch if I want to.’ 

‘Any you boys seen Curley?’ 

They swung their heads toward the door. Looking in was 
Gurley’s wife. Her face was heavily made up. Her lips were 
slightly parted. She breathed strongly, as though she had 
been running. 



72 Of Mice and Men 

‘Curley ain’t been here/ Candy said sourly 

She stood still in the doorway, smiling a little at them, 
rubbing the nails of one hand with the thumb and forefinger 
of the other. And her eyes travelled from one face to another. 
‘They left all the weak ones here/ she said finally. ‘Think I 
don’t know where they all went? Even Curley. I know where 
they all went * 

Lenme watched her fascinated, but Candy and Crooks 
were scowling down away from her eyes. Candy said; ‘Then 
if you know, why you want to ast us where Curley is at?’ 

She regarded them amusedly ‘Funny thing/ she said. ‘If 
I catch any one man, and he’s alone, I get along fine with 
him. But just let two of the guys get together an’ you won’t 
talk. Jus’ nothing but mad ’ She dropped her fingers and 
put her hands on her hips. ‘You’re all scared of each other, 
that’s what. Ever’ one of you’s scared the rest is gom’ to get 
something on you.’ 

After a pause Crooks said; ‘Maybe you better go along to 
your own house now. We don’t want no trouble.’ 

‘Well, I ain’t giving you no trouble. Think I don’t like to 
talk to somebody ever’ once in a while? Think I like to stick 
in that house alia time?’ 

Candy laid the stump of his wrist on his knee and rubbed 
it gently with his hand. He said accusingly: ‘You gotta 
husban’. You got no call foolin’ aroun’ with other guys, 
causin’ trouble.’ 

The girl flared up ‘Sure I gotta husban’. You all seen 
him Swell guy, ain’t he? Spends all his time saym’ what he’s 
gonna do to guys he don’t like, and he don’t like nobody# 
Think I’m gonna stay m that two-by-four house and listen 
how Curley’s gonna lead with his left twice, and then bring 
in the ol’ right cross? “One-two,” he says “Jus’ the oP one- 
two an’ he’ll go down.” ’ She paused and her face lost its 
sullenness and grew interested. ‘Say — what happened to 
Curley’s han’?’ 



Of Mice and Men yg 

There was an embarrassed silence. Gandy stole a look at 
Lennie Then he coughed. ‘Why Gurley ... he got his han’ 
caught m a machine, ma’am. Bust his han’ 1 

She watched for a moment, and then she laughed. 
‘Baloney? What you think you’re sellm’ me? Curley started 
Somep’m he didn’t finish. Caught m a machine - baloney! 
Why, he ain’t give nobody the good oP one-two since he 
got his han’ bust Who bust him?’ 

Candy repeated sullenly: ‘Got it caught in a machine . 9 

‘Awright,’ she said contemptuously. ‘A wright, cover ’im 
up if ya wanta. Whatta I care? You bmdle bums think 
you’re so damn good. Whatta ya think I am, a kid? I tell ya 
I could of went with shows Not jus’ one, neither. An’ a guy 
tol’ me he could put me m pitchers She was breathless 
with indignation - Sat’iday night. Ever’body out doin’ 
som’pin. Ever’body 1 An 5 what am I doin?’ Standin’ here 
talking to a bunch of bmdle stiffs - a nigger an’ a dum-dum 
and a lousy oP sheep - an’ likin’ it because they ain’t no- 
body else ’ 

Lenme watched her, his mouth half open Crooks had re- 
tired into the terrible protective dignity of the negro. But 
a change came over old Candy He stood up suddenly and 
knocked his nail-keg over backward. T had enough,’ he 
said angrily. ‘You ain’t wanted here. We told you you ain’t. 
An’ I tell ya, you got floosy idears about what us guys 
amounts to You ain’t got sense enough in that chicken head 
to even see that we ain’t stiffs S’pose you get us canned. 
S’pose you do. You think we’ll hit the highway an’ look for 
another lousy two-bit job like this. You don’t know that we 
got our own ranch to go to, an’ our own house. We ain’t got 
to stay here. We gotta house and chickens an’ fruit trees an 9 
a place a hunderd time prettier than this An’ we got fren’s, 
that’s what we got Maybe there was a time when we was 
scared of gettin* canned, but we ain’t no more. We got our 
own Ian’, and it’s ours, an’ we c’n go to it.’ 



74 Of Mice and Men 

Gurley’s wife laughed at him. ‘Baloney,’ she said ‘I seen 
too many you guys. If you had two bits in the worP, why 
you’d be in gettin’ two shots of corn with it and suckin’ the 
bottom of the glass. I know you guys ’ 

Gandy’s face had grown redder and redder, but before 
she was done speaking, he had control of himself He was 
the master of the situation. ‘I might of knew,’ he said gently. 
‘Maybe you just better go along an’ roll your hoop. We 
ain’t got nothing to say to you at all. We know what we got, 
and we don’t care whether you know it or not So maybe 
you better jus’ scatter along now, ’cause Curley maybe ain’t 
gonna like his wife out in the barn with us “bmdle stiffs”.’ 

She looked from one face to another, and they were all 
closed against her. And she looked longest at Lennie, until 
he dropped his eyes in embarrassment. Suddenly she said. 
‘Where’d you get them bruises on your face 9 ’ 

Lennie looked up guiltily. ‘Who - me?’ 

‘Yeah, you.’ 

Lennie looked to Gandy for help, and then he looked al 
his lap again ‘He got his han’ caught in a machine,’ he said 

Gurley’s wife laughed. c O.K , Machine. I’ll talk to yoi 
later. I like machines.’ 

Gandy broke m. ‘You let this guy alone. Don’t you do nc 
messing aroun’ with him I’m gonna tell George what yoi 
says. George won’t have you messm’ with Lennie.’ 

‘Who’s George?’ she asked. ‘The little guy you conn 
with?’ 

Lennie smiled happily. ‘That’s him,’ he said. ‘That’s th 
guy, an’ he’s gonna let me tend the rabbits.’ 

‘Well, if that’s all you want, I might get a couple rabbit 
myself.’ 

Grooks stood up from his bunk and faced her. ‘I ha 
enough,’ he said coldly. ‘You got no rights cornin’ in 
coloured man’s room. You got no rights messing around i 
here at all. Now you jus’ get out, an’ get out quick. If yo 



Of Mice and Men 75 

don’t, I’m gonna ast the boss not to ever let you come in the 
barn no more/ 

She turned to him in scorn. ‘Listen, Nigger/ she said. 
‘You know what I can do to you if you open your trap? 9 

Crooks stared hopelessly at her, and then he sat down on 
his bunk and drew into himself 

She closed on him. ‘You know what I could do? 9 
Crooks seemed to grow smaller, and he pressed himself 
against the wall ‘Yes, ma’am/ 

‘Well, you keep your place then, Nigger. I could get you 
strung up on a tree so easy it ain’t even funny 9 

Crooks had reduced himself to nothing. There was no 
personality, no ego ~ nothing to arouse either like or dislike. 
He said. ‘Yes, ma’am, 9 and his voice was toneless. 

For a moment she stood over him as though waiting for 
him to move so that she could whip at him again; but 
Crooks sat perfectly still, his eyes averted, everything that 
might be hurt drawn in. She turned at last to the other two. 

Old Candy was watching her, fascinated. ‘If you was to 
do that, we 9 d tell, 9 he said quietly. ‘We’d tell about you 
framin’ Crooks/ 

‘Tell an 9 be damned, 9 she cried. ‘Nobody’d listen to you, 
an 9 you know it. Nobody’d listen to you/ 

Candy subsided. ‘No, 9 he agreed. Nobody’d listen to 
us 9 

Lennie whined: ‘I wisht George was here. I wisht George 
was here 9 

Candy stepped over to him. ‘Don’t you worry none, 9 he 
said. ‘I jus 9 heard the guys cornin’ im George’ll be in the 
bunk-house right now, I bet. 9 He turned to Curley’s wife. 
‘You better go home now, 9 he said quietly. ‘If you go right 
now, we won’t tell Curley you was here/ 

She appraised him coolly. ‘I ain’t sure you heard nothing/ 
‘Better not take no chances,’ he said. ‘If you ain’t sure you 
better take the safe way/ 



y6 Of Mice and Men 

She turned to Lennie. ‘I’m glad you bust up Curley a little 
bit. He got it comm 5 to him. Sometimes I’d like to bust him 
myself’ She slipped out the door and disappeared into the 
dark barn. And while she went through the barn, the halter 
chains rattled, and some horses snorted and some stamped 
their feet. 

Crooks seemed to come slowly out of the layers of protec- 
tion he had put on ‘Was that the truth what you said about 
the guys come back?’ he asked. 

‘Sure I heard ’em 5 

‘Well, I didn’t hear nothing.’ 

‘The gate banged,’ Candy said, and he went on, ‘Jesus 
Christ, Curley’s wife can move quiet. I guess she had a lot 
of practice though.’ 

Crooks avoided the whole subject now. ‘Maybe you guys 
better go,’ he said. ‘I ain’t sure I want you m here no more. 
A coloured man goi to have some rights, even if he don’t 
like ’em.’ 

Candy said: ‘That bitch didn’t ought to of said that to 
you ’ 

‘It wasn’t nothing,’ Crooks said dully. ‘You guys cornin’ 
in an’ settin’ made me forget. What she says is true ’ 

The horses snorted out in the barn and the chains rang 
and a voice called: ‘Lennie. Oh, Lennie. You in the barn?’ 

‘It’s George,’ Lennie cned. And he answered: ‘Here, 
George. I’m right m here.’ 

In a second George stood framed in the door, and he 
looked disapprovingly about. ‘What you doin’ in Crooks’s 
room. You hadn’t ought to be here.’ 

Crooks nodded. ‘I tol’ ’em, but they come in anyways.’ 

‘Well, why’n’t you kick ’em out?’ 

‘I di’n’t care much,’ said Crooks. ‘Lennie’s a nice fella.’ 

Now Capdy aroused himself ‘Oh, George! I been figurin’ 
and figurin’. I got it doped out how we can even make some 
money on them rabbits.’ 



Of Mice and Men yy 

George scowled* ‘I fought I toP you not to tell nobody 
about that. 9 

Gandy was crest-fallen. ‘Didn’t tell nobody but Crooks. 9 

George said: ‘Well you guys get outa here. Jesus, seems 
like I can’t go away for a minute. 9 

Candy and Lennie stood up and went toward the door. 
Crooks called: ‘Candy 1’ 

‘Huh?’ 

‘ ’Member what I said about hoein’ and doin’ odd jobs?’ 

‘Yeah,’ said Candy. ‘I remember.’ 

‘Well, jus’ forget it,’ said Crooks. ‘I didn’ mean it. Jus’ 
foolin’. I wouldn’t want to go no place like that.’ 

‘Well, O.K., if you feel like that. Good night ’ 

The three men went out of the door. As they went through 
the barn the horses snorted and the halter chains rattled. 

Crooks sat on his bunk and looked at the door for a 
moment, and then he reached for the liniment bottle. He 
pulled out his shirt at the back, poured a little liniment m 
his pink palm and, reaching around, he fell slowly to rubbing 
his back. 

★ 

One end of the great barn was piled high with new hay and 
over the pile hung the four-taloned jackson fork suspended 
from its pulley. The hay came down like a mountain slope 
to tbe other end of the bam, and there was a level place as 
yet unfilled with the new crop. At the sides the feeding racks 
were visible, and between the slats the heads of horses could 
be seen. 

It was Sunday afternoon. The resting horses nibled the 
remaining wisps of hay, and they stamped their feet and 
they bit the wood of the mangers and rattled the halter 
chains The afternoon sun sliced m through the cracks of the 
barn walls and lay m bright lines on the hay. There was 
the buzz of flies in the air, the lazy afternoon humming. 



78 Of Mice and Men 

From outside came the clang of horseshoes on the playing 
peg and the shouts of men, playing, encouraging, jeering But 
in the barn it was quiet and humming and lazy and warm. 

Only Lennie was in the barn, and Lenme sat m the hay 
beside a packing-case under a manger m the end of the bam 
that had not been filled with hay. Lennie sat m the hay 
and looked at a little dead puppy that lay m front of him. 
Lennie looked at it for a long time, and then he put out his 
huge hand and stroked it, stroked it clear from one end to 
the other. 

And Lennie said softly to the puppy. ‘Why do you got to 
get killed? You ain’t so little as mice. I didn’t bounce you 
hard. 9 He bent the pup’s head up and looked in its face, and 
he said to it: ‘Now maybe George ain’t gonna let me tend 
no rabbits, if he fin’s out you got killed ’ 

He scooped a little hollow and laid the puppy in it and 
covered it over with hay, out of sight; but he continued to 
stare at the mound he had made. He said: ‘This ain’t no bad 
thing like I got to go hide m the brush. Oh! no. This ain’t. 
I’ll tell George I foun’ it dead. 9 

He unburied the puppy and inspected it, and he stroked 
it from ears to tail. He went on sorrowfully* ‘But he’ll know. 
George always knows. He’ll say* “You done it. Don’t try 
to put nothing over on me.” An’ he’ll say: “Now jus’ for that 
you don’t get to tend no rabbits!” 9 

Suddenly his anger rose. ‘God damn you, 9 he cried. ‘Why 
do you got to get killed? You ain’t so little as mice 9 He 
picked up the pup and hurled it from him. He turned his 
back on it. He sat bent over his knees and he whispered: 
‘Now I won’t get to tend the rabbits Now he won’t let me.’ 
He rocked himself back and forth in his sorrow. 

From outside came the clang of horseshoes on the iron 
stake, and then a little chorus of cries. Lennie got up and 
brought the puppy back and laid it on the hay and sat down 
He stroked the pup again. ‘You wasn’t big enough,’ he said. 



Of Mice and Men 79 

‘They toP me and toP me you wasn't. I di’n’t know you’d 
get killed so easy.’ He worked his fingers on the pup’s limp 
ear. ‘Maybe George won’t care/ he said. ‘This here God 
damn little son-of-a-bitch wasn’t nothing to George.’ 

Gurley’s wife came around the end of the last stall. She 
came very quietly, so that Lennie didn’t see her. She wore 
her bright cotton dress and the mules with the red ostrich 
feathers. Her face was made up and the little sausage curls 
were all m place. She was quite near to him before Lennie 
looked up and saw her. 

In a panic he shovelled hay over the puppy with his 
fingers. He looked sullenly up at her. 

She said. ‘What you got there, sonny boy?’ 

Lennie glared at her. ‘George says I ain’t to have nothing 
to do with you - talk to you or nothing.’ 

She laughed. ‘George giving you orders about every- 
thing?’ 

Lenme looked down at the hay. ‘Says I can’t tend no rab- 
bits if I talk to you or anything.’ 

She said quietly: ‘He’s scared Gurley’ll get mad. Well, 
Gurley got his arm in a sling - an’ if Curley gets tough, you 
can break his other han\ You didn’t put nothing over on 
me about gettin’ it caught on no machine.’ 

But Lennie was not to be drawn. ‘No, sir. I ain’t gonna 
talk to you or nothing.’ 

She knelt in the hay beside him. ‘Listen/ she said. ‘All 
the guys got a horseshoe tenement goin’ on. It’s on’y about 
four o’clock. None of them guys is goin’ to leave that tene- 
ment. Why can’t I talk to you? I never get to talk to nobody, 
I get awful lonely.’ 

Lennie said: ‘Well, I ain’t supposed to talk to you or 
nothing.’ 

‘I get lonely,’ she said. ‘You can talk to people, but I can’t 
talk to nobody but Gurley. Else he gets mad. How’d you 
like not to talk to anybody?’ 



80 Of Mice and Men 

Lennie said: ‘Well, I ain’t supposed to. George’s scared 
I’ll get in trouble 5 

She changed the subject. ‘What you got covered up 
there? 5 

Then all of Lennie’s woe came back on him. ‘Jus’ my 
pup/ he said sadly c Jus 5 my little pup 5 And he swept the 
hay from on top of it. 

‘Why, he’s dead/ she cried. 

‘He was so little/ said Lennie. T was jus 5 playin’ with 
him ... an 5 he made like he’s gonna bite me ... an 5 I made 
like I was gonna smack him ... an 5 .. an 5 I done it. An 5 then 
he was dead.’ 

She consoled him. ‘Don’t you worry none. He was jus 5 a 
mutt You can get another one easy. The whole country is 
fiilla mutts ’ 

Tt ain’t that so much/ Lenme explained miserably. 
‘George ain’t gonna let me tend no rabbits now. 5 

‘Why don’t he?’ 

‘Well, he said if I done any more bad things he ain’t gonna 
let me tend the rabbits 5 

She moved closer to him and she spoke soothingly ‘Don’t 
you worry about talkin’ to me. Listen to the guys yell out 
there. They got four dollars bet in that tenement. None of 
them ain’t gonna leave till it’s over ’ 

‘If George sees me talkin’ to you he’ll give me hell/ 
Lennie said cautiously. ‘He tol 5 me so ’ 

Her face grew angry ‘What’s the matter with me?’ she 
cried. ‘Ain’t I got a right to talk to nobody? Whatta they 
think I am, anyways? You’re a nice guy. I don’t know why 
I can’t talk to you. I ain’t doin’ no harm to you. 5 

‘Well, George says you’ll get us m a mess,’ 

‘Aw, nuts 1 5 she said. ‘What kinda harm am I doin’ to you? 
Seems like they ain’t none of them cares how I gotta live. 
I tell you I ain’t used to livin’ like this. I coulda made some- 
thin’ of myself.’ She said darkly: ‘Maybe I will yet.’ And 



Of Mice and Men 8 1 

then her words tumbled out in a passion of communication, 
as though she hurried before her listener could be taken 
away. ‘I live right in Salmas, 5 she said ‘Come there when 
I was a kid. Well, a show come through, an 5 I met one of 
the actors He says I could go with that show. But my oF 
lady wouldn't let me She says because I was on’y fifteen. 
But the guy says I coulda. If I'd went, I wouldn't be livin' 
like this, you bet. 5 

Lenme stroked the pup back and forth. ‘We gonna have 
a little place - an 5 rabbits, 5 he explained. 

She went on with her story quickly, before she should be 
interrupted. 6 5 Nother time I met a guy, an 5 he was in 
pitchers. Went out to the Riverside Dance Palace with him. 
He says he was gonna put me in the movies Says I was a 
natural Soon's he got back to Hollywood he was gonna 
write to me about it. 5 She looked closely at Lenme to see 
whether she was impressing him. ‘I never got that letter, 5 
she said. ‘I always thought my ol 5 lady stole it. Well, I 
wasn’t gonna stay no place where I couldn’t get nowhere 
or make something of myself, an 5 where they stole your let- 
ters. I ast her if she stole it, too, an 5 she says no. So I mar- 
ried Gurley. Met him out to the Riverside Dance Palace 
that same night. 5 She demanded: ‘You listenin’? 5 

‘Me? Sure. 5 

‘Well, I ain’t told this to nobody before. Maybe I oughtn* 
to. I don 5 like Curley. He ain’t a nice fella/ And because 
she had confided in him, she moved closer to Lennie and 
sat beside him. ‘Coulda been in the movies, an 5 had nice 
clothes - all them nice clothes like they wear. An 5 I coulda 
sat m them big hotels, an 5 had pitchers took of me. When 
they had them previews I coulda went to them, an 5 spoke 
in the radio, an 5 it wouldn’t cost me a cent because I was 
in the pitcher. An 5 all them nice clothes like they wear 
Because this guy says I was a natural. 5 She looked up at 
Lennie, and she made a small grand gesture with her arm 



82 Of Mice and Men 

and hand to show that she could act. The fingers trailed 
after her leading wrist, and her little finger stuck out grandly 
from the rest. 

Lennie sighed deeply. From outside came the clang of a 
horseshoe on metal, and then a chorus of cheers. ‘Somebody 
made a ringer/ said Curley’s wife. 

Now the light was lifting as the sun went down, and the 
sun-streaks climbed up the wall and fell over the feeding- 
rocks and over the heads of the horses. 

Lennie said: ‘Maybe if I took this pup out and throwed 
him away, George wouldn’t never know. An’ then I could 
tend the rabbits without no trouble.’ 

Curley’s wife said angrily ‘Don’t you think of nothing 
but rabbits?’ 

‘We gonna have a little place,’ Lennie explained patiently. 
‘We gonna have a house an’ a garden and a place for alfalfa, 
an’ that alfalfa is for the rabbits, an’ I take a sack and get it 
all fulla alfalfa and then I take it to the rabbits.’ 

She asked: ‘What makes you so nuts about rabbits?’ 

Lennie had to think carefully before he could come to a 
conclusion. He moved cautiously close to her, until he was 
right against her. ‘I like to pet nice things. Once at a fair 
I seen some of them long-hair rabbits. An’ they was mce, 
you bet. Sometimes I’ve even pet mice, but not when I 
could get nothing better.’ 

Curley’s wife moved away from him a little. ‘I think 
you’re nuts,’ she said. 

‘No I ain’t,’ Lennie explained earnestly. ‘George says I 
ain’t. I like to pet nice things with my fingers, sof ’ things ’ 

She was a little bit reassured. ‘Well, who don’t?’ she said. 
‘Ever’body likes that. I like to feel silk an’ velvet Do you 
like to feel velvet?’ 

Lennie chuckled with pleasure. ‘You bet, by God,’ he 
cried happily. ‘An’ I had some, too. A lady give me some, 
an’ that lady was - my own Aunt Clara. She give it right to 



Of Mice and Men 83 

me - ’bout this big a piece I wisht I had that velvet right 
now. 5 A frown came over his face ‘I lost it,’ he said. T ain’t 
seen it for a long time 5 

Gurley’s wife laughed at him. ‘You’re nuts,’ she said. 
‘But you’re a kinda nice fella. Jus’ like a big baby But a 
person can see kinda what you mean. When I’m doin’ my 
hair sometimes I jus’ set an’ stroke it ’cause it’s so soft,’ To 
show how she did it, she ran her fingers over the top of her 
head. ‘Some people got kinda coarse hair,’ she said com- 
placently. ‘Take Gurley. His hair is jus’ like wire. But mine 
is soft and fine, ’Course I brush it a lot. That makes it fine. 
Here - feel right here ’ She took Lennie’s hand and put it 
on her head. ‘Feel right aroun’ there an’ see how soft it is.’ 

Lennie’s big fingers fell to stroking her hair. 

‘Don’t you muss it up,’ she said. 

Lennie said. ‘Oh 1 That’s nice,’ and he stroked harder. 
‘Oh, that’s nice.’ 

‘Look out, now, you’ll muss it.’ And then she cned 
angrily: ‘You stop it now, you’ll mess it all up.’ She jerked 
her head sideways, and Lenme’s fingers closed on her hair 
and hung on. ‘Let go,’ she cried. ‘You let go.’ 

Lennie was in a panic. His face was contorted. She 
screamed then, and Lennie’s other hand closed over her 
mouth and nose. ‘Please don’t,’ he begged. ‘Oh 1 Please don’t 
do that. George’ll be mad.’ 

She -struggled violently under his hands. Her feet battered 
on the hay and she writhed to be free; and from under Len- 
nie’s hand came a muffled screaming. Lenme began to cry 
with fright. ‘Oh! Please don’t do none of that,’ he begged. 
‘George gonna say I done a bad thing. He ain’t gonna let 
me tend no rabbits.’ He moved his hand a little and her 
hoarse cry came out. Then Lennie grew angry. ‘Now don’t,’ 
he said. ‘I don’t want you to yell. You gonna* get me in 
trouble jus’ like George says you will. Now don’t you do 
that.’ And she continued to struggle, and her eyes were wild 



84 Of Mice and Men 

with terror. He shook her then, and he was angry with her. 
‘Don’t you go yellin’,’ he said, and he shook her; and her 
body flopped like a fish. And then she was still, for Lennie 
had broken her neck. 

He looked down at her, and carefully he removed his 
hand from over her mouth, and she lay still. T don’t want 
ta hurt you,’ he said, ‘but George’ll be mad if you yell.’ 
When she didn’t answer nor move he bent closely over her. 
He lifted her arm and let it drop. For a moment he seemed 
bewildered And then he whispered m fright: 6 I done a bad 
thing. I done another bad thing.’ 

He pawed up the hay until it partly covered her. 

From outside the barn came a cry of men and the double 
clang of shoes on metal. For the first time Lennie became 
conscious of the outside He crouched down m the hay and 
listened. ‘I done a real bad thing,’ he said ‘I shouldn’t of 
did that. George’ll be mad. An’ . he said ... an’ hide in the 
brush till he come He’s gonna be mad. In the brush till he 
come. Tha’s what he said ’ Lenme went back and looked at 
the dead girl. The puppy lay close to her. Lennie picked it 
up. ‘I’ll throw him away,’ he said. ‘It’s bad enough like it 
is.’ He put the pup under his coat, and he crept to the barn 
wall and peered out between the cracks, toward the horse- 
shoe game. And then he crept around the end of the last 
manger and disappeared 

% The sun-streaks were high on the wall by now, and the 
light was growing soft m the barn. Gurley’s wife lay on her 
back, and she was half covered w r ith hay. 

It was very quiet in the barn, and the quiet of the after- 
noon was on the ranch Even the clang of the pitched shoes, 
even the voices of the men m the game seemed to grow more 
quiet. The air in the barn was dusky in advance of the out- 
side day. A pigeon flew in through the open hay door and 
circled and flew out again. Around the last stall came a 
shepherd bitch, lean and long, with heavy, hanging dugs. 



Of Mice and Men 85 

Half-way to the packing-box where the puppies were, she 
caught the dead scent of Gurley’s wife, and the hair arose 
along her spine. She whimpered and cringed to the packing- 
box, and jumped in among the puppies. 

Gurley’s wife lay with a half-covering of yellow hay. And 
the meanness and the plannings and the discontent and the 
ache for attention were all gone from her face. She was very 
pretty and simple, and her face was sweet and young. Now 
her rouged cheeks and her reddened lips made her seem 
alive and sleeping very lightly. The curls, tiny little saus- 
ages, were spread on the hay behind her head, and her lips 
were parted. 

As happens sometimes, a moment settled and hovered 
and remained for much more than a moment. And sound 
stopped and movement stopped for much, much more than 
a moment 

Then gradually time awakened again and moved slug- 
gishly on The horses stamped on the other side of the feed- 
ing-racks and the halter chains clinked Outside, the men’s 
voices became louder and clearer. 

From around the end of the last stall old Gandy’s voice 
came. ‘Lennie,’ he called. ‘Oh, Lemuel You in here? I been 
figuring some more. Tell you what we can do, Lennie.’ Old 
Gandy appeared around the end of the last stall. ‘Oh, Len- 
niel’ he called again; and then he stopped, and his body 
stiffened. He rubbed his smooth wrist on his white stubble 
whiskers. T di’n’t know you was here,’ he said to Gurley’s 
wife. 

When she didn’t answer, he stepped nearer. ‘You oughten’ 
to sleep out here,’ he said disapprovingly; and then he was 
beside her and - ‘Oh, Jesus Christ!’ He looked about help- 
lessly, and he rubbed his beard. And then he jumped up 
and went quickly out of the bam. 

But the barn was alive now. The horses stamped and 
snorted, and they chewed the straw of their bedding and 



86 Of Mice and Men 

they clashed the chains of their halters In a moment Candy 
came back, and George was with him 

George said ‘What was it you wanted to see me about? 5 

Gandy pointed at Curley’s wife. George stared What’s 
the matter with her?’ he asked. He stepped closer, and then 
he echoed Candy’s words ‘Oh, Jesus Christ 1 ’ he was down 
on his knees beside her. He put his hand over her heart And 
finally, when he stood up, slowly and stiffly, his face was as 
hard and tight as wood, and his eyes were hard. 

Candy said: ‘What done it?’ 

George looked coldly at him. ‘Ain’t you got any idear?’ 
he asked And Candy was silent. ‘I should of knew,’ George 
said hopelessly. ‘I guess maybe way back in my head I did.’ 

Candy asked: ‘What we gonna do now, George. What 
we gonna do now?’ 

George was a long time m answering. ‘Guess , . we gotta 
tell the ... guys. I guess we gotta get ’im an’ lock ’im up. 
We can’t let ’im get away Why, the poor bastard’d starve.’ 
And he tried to reassure himself. ‘Maybe they’ll lock ’im up 
an’ be nice to ’im.’ 

But Candy said excitedly ‘We oughtta let ’im get away. 
You don’t know that Curley. Curley go’n’ta wanta get ’im 
lynched. Curley’ll get ’im killed.’ 

George watched Candy’s lips ‘Yeah,’ he said at last, 
‘that’s right, Gurley will An’ the other guys will.’ And he 
looked back at Curley’s wife 

Now Candy spoke his greatest fear. ‘You an’ me can get 
that little place, can’t we, George? You an’ me can go there 
an’ live nice, can’t we, George? Can’t we?’ 

Before George answered, Candy dropped his head and 
looked down at the hay. He knew. 

George said softly: c - I think I knowed from the very first. 
I think I knowed we’d never do her He usta like to hear 
about it so much I got to thinking maybe we would/ 

‘Then - it’s all off?’ Candy asked sulkily. 



Of Mice and Men 87 

George didn't answer his question. George said* Til work 
my month an 9 I'll take my fifty bucks an 9 I'll stay all night 
in some lousy cat-house. Or I'll set in some pool-room till 
ever’body goes home. An' then I'll come back an' work 
another month an' I'll have fifty bucks more.' 

Gandy said. 'He’s such a puce fella. I didn' think he'd do 
nothing like this.' 

George still stared at Curley's wife. 'Lennie never done 
it in meanness/ he said. 'All the time he done bad things 
but he never done one of ’em mean ' He straightened up 
and looked back at Gandy. 'Now listen. We gotta tell the 
guys They got to bring him m, I guess. They ain't no way 
out. Maybe they won't hurt ’im.' He said sharply: T ain't 
gonna let 'em hurt Lenme. Now you listen. The guys might 
think I was in on it. I'm gonna go in the bunk-house. Then 
in a minute you come out and tell the guys about her, and 
I’ll come along and make like I never seen her Will you do 
that? So the guys won’t think I was on it?' 

Candy said: ‘Sure, George. Sure I'll do that.' 

'O.K. Give me a couple minutes then, and you come 
runnin’ out an' tell like you jus' found her. I'm going now/ 
George turned and went quickly out of the barn. 

Old Gandy watched him go. He looked helplessly back 
at Gurley's wife, and gradually his sorrow and his anger 
grew into words. 'You God damn tramp/ he said viciously. 
'You, done it, di’n't you? I s'pose you're glad. Ever’body 
knowed you'd mess things up. You wasn't no good. You 
ain't no good now, you lousy tart.' He snivelled, and 4 ns 
voice shook. 'I could of hoed in the garden and washed 
dishes for them guys.' He paused, and then went on in a 
sing-song. And he repeated the old words: 'If they was a 
circus or a baseball game ... we would of went to her ... jus' 
said "ta hell with work", an' went to her. Never ast nobody's 
say so. An' they'd of been a pig and chickens ... an' in the 
winter ... the little fat stove ... an' the rain cornin' ... an' us 



88 Of Mice and Men 

jus" settin 9 there 9 His eyes blinded with tears and he turned 
and went weakly out of the bam, and he rubbed his bristly 
whiskers with his wrist stump 

Outside the noise of the game stopped. There was a rise 
of voices in question, a drum of running feet and the men 
burst into the barn. Slim and Garlson and young White and 
Curley, and Crooks keeping back out of attention range. 
Gandy came after them, and last of all came George George 
had put on his blue denim coat and buttoned it, and his 
black hat was pulled down low over his eyes. The men raced 
around the last stall. Their eyes found Curley’s wife in the 
gloom, they stopped and stood still and looked 

Then Slim went quietly over to her, and he felt her wrist. 
One lean finger touched her cheek, and then his hand went 
under her slightly twisted neck and his fingers explored her 
neck When he stood up the men crowded near and the spell 
was broken. 

Curley came suddenly to life. T know who done it, 9 he 
cried. ‘That big son-of~a-bitch done it. I know he done it. 
Why — ever’body else was out there playin’ horseshoes. 9 He 
worked himself into a fury. T 9 m gonna get him I’m going 
for my shot-gun. I 9 11 kill the big son-of-a-bitch myself. I’ll 
shoot 9 im in the guts. Come on, you guys 9 He ran furiously 
out of the barn Carlson said: T’ll get my Luger, 9 and he 
ran out, too. 

Slim turned quietly to George. T guess I^ennie done it, 
all right, 9 he said. ‘Her neck’s bust Lenme coulda did that. 9 

George didn’t answer, but he nodded slowly. His hat was 
so far down on his forehead that his eyes were covered. 

Slim went on: ‘Maybe like that time in Weed you was 
tellin 9 about. 9 

Again George nodded. 

Slim sighed. ‘Well, I guess we got to get him. Where you 
think he might of went? 9 

It seemed to take George some time to free his words. 



Of Mice and Men 89 

‘He - would of went south,’ he said. c We come from north 
so he would of went south/ 

‘I guess we gotta get ’im,’ Slim repeated. 

George stepped close. ‘Couldn’ we maybe bring him in 
an 5 they’ll lock him up? He’s nuts, Slim He never done this 
to be mean 9 

Slim nodded. 6 We might, 9 he said. ‘If we could keep Gur- 
ley m, we might But Gurley’s gonna want to shoot 9 im. 
Gurley’s still mad about his hand. An’ s’pose they lock him 
up an’ strap him down and put him m a cage. That ain’t no 
good, George.’ 

T know,’ said George T know/ 

Carlson came running in. ‘The bastard’s stole my Luger, 9 
he shouted. Tt ain’t m my bag/ Gurley followed him, and 
Gurley carried a shot-gun in his good hand. Gurley was 
cold now. 

‘All right, you guys,’ he said ‘The nigger’s got a shot-gun. 
You take it, Carlson. When you see ’urn, don’t give ’im no 
chance Shoot for his guts. That’ll double ’im over/ 

Whit said excitedly: ‘I ain’t got a gun/ 

Curley said: ‘You go in Soledad an’ get a cop Get AI 
Wilts, he’s deputy sheriff. Le’s go now/ He turned suspici- 
ously on George. ‘You’re cornin’ with us, fella/ 

‘Yeah,’ said George. ‘I’ll come But listen, Gurley. The 
poor bastard’s nuts Don’t shoot ’im He di’n’t know what 
he was doin’/ 

‘Don’t shoot ’im?’ Gurley cned. ‘He got Carlson’s Luger. 
’Course we’ll shoot ’im/ 

George said weakly: ‘Maybe Carlson lost his gun/ 

‘I seen it this morning,’ said Carlson. ‘No, it’s been took.’ 

Slim stood looking down at Curley’s wife. He said: 
‘Curley — maybe you better stay here with your wife.’ 

Curley’s face reddened. ‘I’m gom’,’ he said. ‘I’m gonna 
shoot the guts outa that big bastard myself, even if I only 
got one hand I’m gonna get ’im/ 



90 Of Mice and Men 

Slim turned to Candy "You stay here with her then. 
Candy. The rest of us better get go m* 5 

They moved away George stopped a moment beside 
Candy* and they both looked down at the dead girl until 
Curley called. "You, George! You stick with us so we don’t 
think you had nothin’ to do with this 9 

George moved slowly after them, and his feet dragged 
heavily. 

And when they were gone, Candy squatted down in the 
hay and watched the face of Curley’s wife "Poor bastard/ 
he said sofdy. 

The sound of the men grew* fainter. The barn was darken- 
ing gradually and, m their stalls, the horses shifted their feet 
and rattled the halter chains Old Candy lay down in the 
hay and covered his eyes with his arm. 

★ 

The deep green pool of the Salinas River was still in the 
late afternoon. Already the sun had left the valley to go 
climbing up the slopes of the Gabilan mountains, and the 
hill-tops were rosy in the sun. But by the pool among the 
mottled sycamores, a pleasant shade had fallen. 

A water-snake glided smoothly up the pool, twisting its 
periscope head from side to side; and it swam the length of 
the pool and came to the legs of a motionless heron that 
stood in the shallows. A silent head and beak lanced .down 
and plucked it out by the head, and the beak swallowed the 
little snake while its tail waved frantically. 

A far rush of wind sounded and a gust drove through the 
tops of the trees like a wave. The sycamore leaves turned up 
their silver sides, the brown, dry leaves on the ground scud- 
ded a few feet And row on row of tiny wind-waves flowed 
up the pool’s surface. 

As quickly as it had come, the wind died, and the clearing 
was quiet again. The heron stood in the shallows, motionless 



Of Mice and Men gi 

and waiting Another little watei -snake swam up the pool, 
turning its periscope head from side to side 

Suddenly Lennie appeared out of the brush, and he came 
as silently as a creeping bear moves The heron pounded 
the air with its wings, jacked itself clear of the water and 
flew off dow n-river. The little snake slid in among the reeds 
at the poofs side 

Lenme came quietly to the poofs edge He knelt down 
and drank, barely touching his lips to the water When a 
little bird skittered over the dry leaves behind him, his head 
jerked up and he strained toward the sound with eyes and 
ears until he saw the bird, and then he dropped his head 
and drank again. 

When he had finished, he sat down on the bank, with his 
side to the pool, so that he could watch the trail’s entrance 
He embraced his knees and laid his chin down on his knees. 

The light climbed on out of the valley, and as it went, the 
tops of the mountains seemed to blaze with increasing 
brightness 

Lenme said softly: T di’n’t forget, you bet, God damn 
Hide in the brush an’ wait for George ’ He pulled his hat 
down low over his eyes. ‘ George gonna give me hell , 5 he 
said ‘George gonna wish he was alone an 5 not have me 
botherin’ him . 5 He turned his head and looked at the bright 
mountain-tops T can go right off there an 5 find a cave , 5 he 
said. And he continued sadly c - an 5 never have no ketch- 
up - but I won’t care If George don’t want me ... I’ll go 
away I’ll go away.’ 

And then from out of Lenme’s head there came a little 
fat old woman She wore thick bull’s-eye glasses and she 
wore a huge gingham apron with pockets, and she was 
starched and clean. She stood m front of Lennie and put 
her hands on her hips, and she frowned disapprovingly at 
him. 

And when she spoke, it was in Lennie’s voice. T tol’ you 



92 Of Mice and Men 

an* toP you,’ she said. ‘I toP \ou, “Min’ George because 
he’s such a nice fella an 5 good to you 55 But >ou don’t ne\er 
take no care You do bad things. 5 

And Lenme answered her ‘I tried. Aunt Clara ma’am, 
I tried and tried. I couldn’t help it. 5 

‘You never give a thought to George, 5 she went on in 
Lennie’s voice ‘He’s been doin’ nice things for you alia time. 
When he got a piece a pie you always got half ormore’n half. 
An* if they was any ketchup, why, he’d give it all to you 5 
‘I know, 5 said Lenme miserably. ‘I tried, Aunt Clara 
ma’am. I tried and tried 5 

She interrupted him. ‘All the time he coulda had such a 
good time if it wasn’t for you He woulda took his pay an 5 
raised hell in a whore-house, and he coulda set m a pool- 
room an 5 played snooker. But he got to take care of you. 5 

Lenme moaned with grief ‘I know, Aunt Clara, ma’am. 
I’ll go right off in the hills an’ I’ll fin 5 a cave an’ I’ll live 
there so I won’t be no more trouble to George 5 

‘You jus 5 say that, 5 she said sharply ‘You’re always 
sayin 3 that, an 5 you know son-of-a-bitchxng well you ain’t 
never gonna do it You’ll jus 5 stick around an’ stew the 
b’Jesus outa George all the time 5 

Lennie said. ‘I might jus 5 as well go away George ain’t 
gonna let me tend no rabbits now.’ 

Aunt Clara was gone, and from out of Lennie’s head there 
came a gigantic rabbit It sat on its haunches m front of him, 
and it waggled its ears and crinkled its nose at him And it 
spoke in Lenme’s voice, too. 

‘Tend rabbits, 5 it said scornfully ‘You crazy bastard. You 
ain’t fit to lick the boots of no rabbit. You’d forget ’em and 
let ’em go hungry. That’s what you’d do An’ then what 
would George think?’ 

T would not forget,’ Lennie said loudly 
‘The hell you wouldn’,’ said the rabbit. ‘You ain’t worth 
a greased jack-pin to ram you into hell. Christ knows George 



Of Mice and Men 93 

done everything he could to jack \ou outa the sewer, but it 
don’t do no good If \ou think George gonna let \ou tend 
rabbits, \ou*re e\ en crazier’n usual. He ain’t He’s gonna 
beat hell outa you with a stick, that’s what he’s gonna do . 5 

Now Lenrne retorted belligerently. ‘He ain’t neither. 
George won’t do nothing like that. I’ve knew George since 
- I forget when - and he ain’t never raised his han’ to me 
with a stick He’s nice to me He ain’t gonna be mean ’ 

‘Well, he’s sick of you,’ said the rabbit ‘He’s gonna beat 
hell outa you an’ then go aw r ay an’ leave you.’ 

‘He won’t/ Lenme cried frantically. ‘He won’t do noth* 
ing like that I know George Me an’ him travels together.’ 

But the rabbit repeated softly over and over; ‘He gonna 
leave ya, ya crazy bastard. He gonna leave ya all alone. 
He gonna leave ya, crazy bastard.’ 

Lennie put his hands over his ears. ‘He ain’t, I tell ya he 
ain’t.’ And he cried: ‘Oh! George - George - George!’ 

George came quietly out of the brush and the rabbit scut- 
tled back into Lenme’s brain 

George said quietly* ‘What the hell you yellin’ about?’ 

Lenme got up on his knees. ‘You ain’t gonna leave me, 
are ya, George? I know you ain’t.’ 

George came stiffly near and sat down beside him. ‘No 5 

‘I knowed it/ Lennie cried. ‘You ain’t that kind ’ 

George was silent. 

Lennie said: ‘George.’ 

‘Yeah?’ 

T done another bad thing 5 

‘It don’t make no difference/ George said, and he fell 
silent again. 

Only the topmost ridges were in the sun now. The shadow 
m the valley was blue and soft. From the distance came the 
sound of men shouting to one another. George turned his 
bead and listened to the shouts. 

Lennie said: ‘George 5 



Of Mice and Men 


94 

‘Yeah*’ 

‘Ain’t yon gonna give me hell?’ 

‘Give va help 

‘Sure, like vou always done before. Like* “If I di’n’t have 
you Fd take m\ fifty bucks ’ 

‘Jesus Christ, Lenme 1 You can’t remember nothing that 
happens, but vou remember ever’ \\ ord I say ’ 

‘Well, ain’t \ou gonna say it?’ 

George shook himself He said woodenly ‘If I was alone 
I could live so easy. 9 His voice was monotonous, had no 
emphasis. C I could get a job an’ not have no mess ’ He 
stopped 

‘Go on/ said Lenme ‘An’ when the enda the month 
come 

‘An’ when the end of the month come I could take my 
fifty bucks an’ go to a ... cat-house 3 He stopped again. 

Lenme looked eagerly at him ‘Go on, George. Ain’t you 
gdnna give me no more hell? 3 

‘No,’ said George. 

‘Well, I can go away, 3 said Lennie’ ‘I’ll go right off m the 
hills an’ find a cave if you don’ want me.’ 

George shook himself again. ‘No,’ he said ‘I want you to 
stay with me here ’ 

Lennie said craftily: ‘Tell me like you done before 3 

‘Tell you what? 3 

‘ ’Bout the other guys an 3 about us.’ 

George said- ‘Guys like us got no fambly They make a 
little stake an’ then they blow it in. They ain’t got nobody 
in the worP that gives a hoot m hell about ’em . 

‘ But not usy Lenme cried happily. ‘Tell about us now.’ 

George was quiet for a moment. ‘But not us,’ he said. 

‘Because 

‘Because I got you an’ 

‘An’ I got you. We got each other, that’s what, that gives 
a hoot in hell about us/ Lennie cried m triumph. 



Of Alice and Aim 95 

The little e\ enxng breeze blew over the clearing and the 
leas es rustled and the wind \\ aves flowed up the green pooL 
And the shouts of men sounded again, this time much closer 
than before, 

George took off his hat He said shakily ‘Take off your 
hat, Lennie. The air feels fine * 

Lenme removed his hat dutifully and laid it on the ground 
in front of him. The shadow m the valley was bluer, and the 
evening came fast. On the wind the sound of crashing in 
the brush came to them 

Lennie said: ‘Tell how it’s gonna be 5 

George had been listening to the distant sounds. For a 
moment he was business-like ‘Look acrost the river, Lennie, 
an 5 1 5 11 tell you so you can almost see it/ 

Lennie turned his head and looked off across the pool and 
up the darkening slopes of the Gabilans. ‘We gonna get a 
Ettle place,’ George began. He reached in his side pocket 
and brought out Carlson’s Luger; he snapped off the safety, 
and the hand and gun lay on the ground behind Lennie’s 
back He looked at the back of Lennie’s head, at the place 
where the spine and skull were joined. 

A man’s voice called from up the river, and another man 
answered. 

‘Go on,’ said Lennie. 

George raised the gun and his hand shook, and he dropped 
his hand to the ground again. 

‘Go on,’ said Lennie. ‘How’s it gonna be. We gonna get 
a little place.’ 

‘We’ll have a cow,’ said George. ‘An’ we’ll have maybe 
a pig an’ chickens ... an’ down the flat we’ll have a ... little 
piece alfalfa 

‘For the rabbits,’ Lennie shouted. 

‘For the rabbits,’ George repeated. 

‘And I get to tend the rabbits.’ 

‘An’ you get to tend the rabbits.’ 



96 Of Mice and Men 

Lenme giggled with happiness. "An 5 live on the fatta the 
Ian*/ 

‘Yes.’ 

Lenme turned his head 

‘No, Lenme. Look down there acrost the river, like you 
can almost see the place 5 

Lenme obeyed him George looked down at the gun. 

There were crashing footsteps in the brush now. George 
turned and looked toward them 

‘Go on, George When we gonna do it?’ 

‘Gonna do it soon * 

‘Me an’ you ’ 

‘You . . an’ me Ever 5 body gonna be nice to you. Ain’t 
gonna be no more trouble. Nobody gonna hurt nobody nor 
steal from ’em.’ 

Lenme said: ‘I thought you was mad at me, George ’ 

‘No,’ said George. ‘No, Lenme. I ain’t mad I never been 
mad, an’ I ain’t now. That’s a thing I want ya to know.’ 

The voices came close now. George raised the gun and 
listened to the voices. 

Lennie begged: ‘Le’s to it now. Le’s get that place now.’ 

‘Sure, right now. I gotta. We gotta.’ 

And George raised the gun and steadied it, and he 
brought the muzzle of it close to the back of Lennie’s head. 
The hand shook violently, but his face set and his hand 
steadied He pulled the trigger. The crash of the shot rolled 
up the hills and rolled down again Lennie jarred, and then 
settled slowly forward to the sand, and he lay without 
quivering. 

George shivered and looked at the gun, and then he threw 
it from him, back up on the bank, near the pile of old ashes. 

The brush seemed filled with cries and with the sound of 
running feet. Slim’s voice shouted: ‘George. Where you at, 
George?’ 

But George sat stiffly on the bank and looked at his right 



Of Alice and Men 97 

hand that had thrown the gun away. The group hurst Into 
the clearing, and Curley was ahead. He saw Lennie lying 
on the sand ‘Got him, by God * He went over and looked 
down at Lennie, and then he looked back at George. ‘Right 
in the back of the head, 3 he said softly. 

Slim came directly to George and sat down beside him, 
sat very close to him ‘Never you mind, 3 said Slim ‘A guy 
got to sometimes 3 

But Carlson was standing over George. ‘How’d you do 
it? 3 he asked. 

T just done it, 3 George said tiredly 

‘Did he have my gun? 3 

‘Yeah He had your gun. 3 

‘An 3 you got it away from him and you took it an 3 you 
killed him? 3 

‘Yeah Tha 3 s how. 3 George’s voice was almost a whisper. 
He looked steadily at his right hand that had held the gun. 

Slim twitched George’s elbow. ‘Come on, George. Me 
an 3 you’ll go m an 3 get a drink. 3 

George let himself be helped to his feet. ‘Yeah, a drink. 3 

Slim said: ‘You hadda, George. I swear you hadda. Come 
on with me. 3 He led George into the entrance of the trail 
and up toward the highway. 

Curley and Carlson looked after them. And Carlson said: 

‘Now what the hell ya suppose is eatm 3 them two guys? 3 




Cannery Row 




CAXXERY ROW 


Cannery Row in Monterey in California is a poem, a 
stink, a grating noise, a quality of light, a tone, a habit, a 
nostalgia, a dream Cannery Row is the gathered and scat- 
tered, tin and iron and rust and splintered wood, chipped 
pavement and weedy lots and junk heaps, sardine canneries 
of corrugated iron, honky-tonks, restaurants and whore- 
houses, and little crowded groceries, and laboratories and 
flop-houses. Its inhabitants are, as the man once said, 
‘whores, pimps, gamblers, and sons of bitches , 5 by which he 
meant Everybody. Had the man looked through another 
peep-hole he might have said: ‘Saints and angels and martyrs 
and holy men , 3 and he would have meant the same thing. 

In the morning when the sardine fleet had made a catch, 
the purse-seiners waddle heavily into the bay blowing their 
whistles. The deep-laden boats pull in against the coast 
where the canneries dip their tails into the bay The figure 
is advisedly chosen, for if the canneries dipped their mouths 
into the bay the canned sardines which emerge from the 
other end would be metaphorically, at least, even more hor- 
rifying. Then cannery whistles scream and all over the town 
men and women scramble into their clothes and come run- 
ning.down to the Row to go to work. Then shining cars 
bring the upper classes down: superintendents, accountants, 
owners who disappear into offices. Then from the town pour 
Wops and Chinamen and Polaks, men and women in 
trousers and rubber coats and oilcloth aprons. They come 
running to clean and cut and pack and cook and can the fish. 
The whole street rumbles and groans and screams and rattles 
while the silver rivers of fish pour in out of the boats and 
the boats rise higher and higher in the water until they are 
empty. The canneries rumble and rattle and squeak until 



102 Cannery Ron 

the last fish is cleaned and cut and cooked and canned and 
then the whistles scream again and the dripping, smelly, 
tired Wops and Chinamen and Polaks, men and women, 
straggle out and droop their ways up the hill into the town 
and Cannery 1 * Row becomes itself again - quiet and magical. 
Its normal life returns. The bums who retired m disgust 
under the black cypress-tree come out to sit on the rusty 
pipes in the vacant lot The girls from Dora’s emerge for a 
bit of sun if there is any. Doc strolls from the Western Bio- 
logical Laboratory and crosses the street to Lee Chong’s 
grocery for two quarts of beer. Henri the painter noses like 
an Airedale through the junk in the grass-grown lot for 
some part or piece of wood or metal he needs for the boat 
he is building. Then the darkness edges m and the street 
light comes on in front of Dora’s - the lamp which makes 
perpetual moonlight in Cannery Row. Callers arrive at 
Western Biological to see Doc, and he crosses the street to 
Lee Chong’s for five quarts of beer 

How can the poem and the stink and the grating noise - 
the quality of light, the tone, the habit and the dream - be 
set down alive? When you collect marine animals there are 
certain flat worms so delicate that they are almost impos- 
sible to capture whole, for they break and tatter under the 
touch. You must let them ooze and crawl of their own will 
on to a kmfe blade and then lift them gently into your bottle 
of sea water. And perhaps that might be the way to -write 
this book - to open the page and to let the stories crawl in 
by themselves. 



CHAPTER 1 


Lee Chong’s grocery, while not a model of neatness, was 
a miracle of supply. It was small and crowded but within 
its single room a man could find everything he needed or 
wanted to live and to be happy - clothes, food, both fresh 
and canned, liquor, tobacco, fishing equipment, machinery, 
boats, cordage, caps, pork-chops You could buy at Lee 
Chong’s a pair of slippers, a silk kimono, a quarter-pint of 
whisky and a cigar. You could work out combinations to 
fit almost any mood. The one commodity Lee Chong did 
not keep could be had across the lot at Dora’s. 

The grocery opened at dawn and did not close until the 
last wandering vagrant dime had been spent or retired for 
the night. Not that Lee Chong was avaricious He wasn’t, 
but if one wanted to spend money, he was available Lee’s 
position in the community surprised him as much as he 
could be surprised. Over the course of the years everyone 
in Cannery Row owed him money. He never pressed his 
clients, but when the bill became too large, Lee cut off 
credit. Rather than walk into the town up the hill, the client 
usually paid or tried to. 

Lee was round-faced and courteous He spoke a stately 
English without ever using the letter R. When the tong wars 
were going on in California, it happened now and then that 
Lee found a price on his head. Then he would go secretly to 
San Francisco and enter a hospital until the trouble blew 
over. What he did with his money, no one ever knew. Per- 
haps he didn’t get it. Maybe his wealth was entirely m un- 
paid bills. But he lived well and he had the respect of all his 
neighbours He trusted his clients until further trust became 
ridiculous. Sometimes he made business errors, but even 
these he turned to advantage in good will if in no other way. 



104 Cannery Row 

It was that way with the Palace Flophouse and Grill Any- 
one but Lee Chong would have consideied the transaction 
a total loss 

Lee Chong’s station m the grocery was behind the cigar 
counter. The cash register was then on his left and the 
abacus on his right. Inside the glass case were the brown 
cigars, the cigarettes, the Bull Durham, the Duke’s mixture, 
the Five Brothers, while behind him in racks on the wall 
were the pints, half-pints and quarters of Old Green River, 
Old Town House, Old Colonel, and the favourite - Old 
Tennessee, a blended whisky guaranteed four months old, 
very cheap and known ra the neighbourhood as Old Tennis 
Shoes. Lee Chong did not stand between the whisky and 
the customer without reason. Some very practical minds had 
on occasion tried to divert his attention to another part of 
the store. Cousins, nephews, sons and daughters-m-law 
w r aited on the rest of the siore, but Lee never left the cigar 
counter. The top of the glass was his desk. His fat delicate 
hands rested on the glass, the fingers moving like small rest- 
less sausages. A broad golden wedding-ring on the middle 
finger of his left hand was his only jewellery and with it he 
silently tapped on the rubber change mat from which the 
little rubber tits had long been worn. Lee’s mouth was 
full and benevolent and the flash of gold when he smiled 
was rich and warm He wore half-glasses and since he 
looked at everything through them, he had to tilt his 
head back to see in the distance. Interest and discounts, 
addition, subtraction he worked out on the abacus with 
his little restless sausage fingers, and his brown friendly 
eyes roved over the grocery and his teeth flashed at the 
customers. 

On an evening when he stood in his place on a pad of 
newspaper to keep his feet warm, he contemplated with 
humour and sadness a business deal that had been consum- 
mated that afternoon and reconsummated later that same 



Cannery Row 105 

afternoon When vou leave the grocery, if yon w alk catty- 
cornered across the grass-grown lot, threading >our way 
among the great rusty pipes thrown out of the canneries, 
you will see a path worn m the weeds. Follow" it past the 
cypress-tree, across the railroad track, up a chicken-walk 
with cleats, and you wall come to a long low T building which 
for a long time was used as a storage place for fish meal. It 
was just a great big roofed room and it belonged to a wor- 
ried gentleman named Horace Abbeville. Horace had two 
wives and six children, and over a period of years he had 
managed through pleading and persuasion to build a gro- 
cery debt second to none in Monterey. That afternoon he 
had come into the grocery and his sensitive tired face had 
flinched at the shadow of sternness that crossed Lee’s face. 
Lee’s fat finger tapped the rubber mat. Horace laid his 
hands palm up on the cigar counter T guess I owe you 
plenty dough, 5 he said simply. 

Lee’s teeth flashed up in appreciation of an approach so 
different from any he had ever heard. He nodded gravely, 
but he waited for the trick to develop. 

Horace wet his lips with his tongue, a good job from 
corner to comer. T hate to have my kids with that hanging 
over them , 5 he said. ‘Why, I bet you wouldn’t let them have 
a pack of spearmint now . 5 

Lee Chong’s face agreed with this conclusion. ‘Plenty 
dough,’ he said. 

Horace continued: ‘You know that place of mine across 
the track up there where the fish meal is.’ 

Lee Chong nodded. It was his fish meal. 

Horace said earnestly: ‘If I was to give you that place — 
would it clear me up with you ? 5 

Lee Chong tilted his head back and stared at Horace 
through his half-glasses while his mind flicked among ac- 
counts and his right hand moved restlessly to the abacus. 
He considered the construction which was flimsy and the 



to6 Cannery Row 

lot which might be valuable if a cannerv e\ er wanted to 
expand, ‘Shu/ said Lee Chong 

‘Well, get out the accounts and I’ll make you a bill of 
sale on that place 5 Horace seemed in a hurry 

‘No need papers/ said Lee 4 1 make paid-m-ful! paper/ 

They finished the deal with dignity and Lee Chong threw 
in a quarter-pint of Old Tennis Shoes And then Horace 
Abbeville walking very straight went across the lot and past 
the cypress-tree and across the track and up the chicken-walk 
and into the building that had been his, and he shot him- 
self on a heap of fish meal. And although it has nothing to do 
with this story, no Abbeville child, no matter who its mother 
was, knew the lack of a stick of spearmint ever afterward. 

But to get back to the evening. Horace was on the trestles 
with the embalming needles in him, and his two wives were 
sitting on the steps of his house with their arms about each 
other (they were good friends until after the funeral, and 
then they divided up the children and never spoke to each 
other again). Lee Chong stood behind the cigar counter 
and his nice brown eyes were turned inward on a calm and 
eternal Chinese sorrow. He knew he could not have helped 
it* but he wished he might have known and perhaps tried 
to help. It was deeply a part of Lee’s kindness and under- 
standing that man’s right to kill himself is inviolable, but 
sometimes a friend can make it unnecessary. Lee had already 
underwritten the funeral and sent a wash-basket of groceries 
to the stricken families. 

Now Lee Chong owned the Abbeville building - a good 
roof, a good floor, two windows and a door True it was 
piled high with fish meal and the smell of it was delicate 
and penetrating. Lee Chong considered it as a storehouse 
for groceries, as a kind of warehouse, but he gave that up 
on second thought. It was too far away and anyone can go 
in through a window. He was tapping the rubber mat with 
his gold ring and considering the problem when the door 



Cannery Row 107 

opened and Mack came in. Mack was the elder, leader, 
mentor, and to a small extent the exploiter of a little group 
of men who had in common no families, no money, and no 
ambitions beyond food, drink, and contentment. But whereas 
most men m their search for contentment destroy them- 
selves and fall wearily short of their targets, Mack and his 
friends approached contentment casually, quietly, and ab- 
sorbed it gently. Mack and Hazel, a young man of great 
strength, Eddie who filled in as a bar-tender at La Ida, 
Hughie and Jones who occasionally collected frogs and cats 
for Western Biological, were currently living in those large 
rusty pipes in the lot next to Lee Chong’s. That is, they 
lived m the pipes when it was damp, but in fine weather 
they lived in the shadow of the black cypress- tree at the top 
of the lot. The limbs folded down and made a canopy under 
which a man could lie and look out at the flow and vitality 
of Cannery Row. 

Lee Chong stiffened ever so slightly when Mack came in 
and his eyes glanced quickly about the store to make sure 
that Eddie or Hazel or Hughie or Jones had not come in 
too and drifted away among the groceries. 

Mack laid out his cards with a winning honesty. ‘Lee/ he 
said, T and Eddie and the rest heard you own the Abbeville 
place.’ 

Lee Chong nodded and waited. 

C L and my friends thought we’d ast you if we could move 
in there. We’ll keep up the property,’ he added quickly. 
‘Wouldn’t let anybody break in or hurt anything. Kids 
might knock out the windows, you know . / Mack sug- 
gested. ‘Place might bum down if somebody don’t keep an 
eye on it/ 

Lee tilted his head back and looked into Mack’s eyes 
through the half-glasses and Lee’s tapping finger slowed its 
tempo as he thought deeply. In Mack’s eyes there was good 
will and good fellowship and a desire to make everyone 



xg8 Cannery Row 

happy. Why then did Lee Chong feel slightly surrounded? 
Why did his mind pick its way as delicately as a cat through 
cactus? It had been sweetly done, almost in a spirit of 
philanthropy. Lee’s mind leaped ahead at the possibilities 
- no, they were probabilities, and his finger tapping slowed 
still further. He saw himself refusing Mack’s request and 
he saw the broken glass from the windows Then Mack 
would offer a second time to watch over and preserve Lee’s 
property — and at the second refusal, Lee could smell the 
smoke, could see the little flames creeping up the walls. 
Mack and his friends would try to help to put it out. Lee’s 
finger came to a gentle rest on the change-mat. He was 
beaten. He knew that. There was left to him only the pos- 
sibility of saving face, and Mack was likely to be very 
generous about that Lee said: ‘You like pay lent my place? 
You like live there same hotel?’ 

Mack smiled broadly and he was generous ‘Say . 3 he 
cried. ‘That’s an idear. Sure. How much?’ 

Lee considered. He knew it didn’t matter what he charged* 
He wasn’t going to get it, anyway He might just as well make 
it a really sturdy face-saving sum ‘Fi’ dolia’ week , 3 said Lee. 

Mack played it through to the end. ‘I’ll have to talk to 
the boys about it,’ he said dubiously. ‘Couldn’t you make 
that four dollars a week ? 3 

‘Fi’ dolla,’ said Lee firmly, 

‘Well, I’ll see what the boys say,’ said Mack. 

And that was the way it was. Everyone was happy about 
it. And if it be thought that Lee Chong suffered a total loss, 
at least his mind did not work that way. The windows were 
not broken. Fire did not break out, and while no rent was 
ever paid, if the tenants ever had any money, and quite 
often they did have, it never occurred to them to spend it 
anywhere except at Lee Chong’s grocery. What he had was 
a little group of active and potential customers under wraps. 
But it went further than that. If a drunk caused trouble in 



Cannery Haw 109 

the grocery, if the kids swarmed down from New Monterey 
Intent on plunder, Lee Chong had only to call and his 
tenants rushed to his aid. One further bond it established - 
you cannot steal from your benefactor. The saving to Lee 
Chong in cans of beans and tomatoes and milk and water- 
melons more than paid the rent. And if there was a sudden 
and increased leakage among the groceries in New Mon- 
terey that was none of Lee Chong’s affair. 

The boys moved m and the fish-meal moved out. No one 
knows who named the house that has been known ever after 
as the Palace Flophouse Grill. In the pipes and under the 
cypress-tree there had been no room for furniture and the 
little niceties which are not only the diagnoses but the boun- 
daries of our civilization. Once in the Palace Flophouse, 
the boys set about furnishing it. A chair appeared and a cot 
and another chair. A hardware store supplied a can of red 
paint not reluctantly because it never knew about it, and 
as a new table or footstool appeared it was painted, which 
not only made it very pretty but also disguised it to a 
certain extent in case a former owner looked in. And the 
Palace Flophouse Grill began to function. The boys 
could sit m front of their doos and look down across the 
track and across the lot and across the street right into the 
front windows of Western Biological. They could hear the 
music from the laboratory at night. And their eyes followed 
Doc across the street when he went to Lee Chong’s for beer. 
And Mack said: ‘That Doc is a fine fellow. We ought to do 
something for him.’ 


CHAPTER II 

T he word is a symbol and a delight which sucks up men 
and scenes, trees, plants, factories, and Pekinese. Then the 
Thing becomes the Word and back to Thing again, but 



no 


Cannery Row 

warped and woven into a fantastic pattern. The Word sucks 
up Cannery Row, digests it and spews it out, and the Row 
has taken the shimmer of the green world and the sky- 
reflecting seas. Lee Chong is more than a Chinese grocer. 
He must be. Perhaps he is evil balanced and held suspended 
by good - an Asiatic planet held to its orbit by the pull of 
Lao Tze and held away from Lao Tze by the centrifugal! ty 
of abacus and cash register - Lee Chong suspended, spin- 
ning, whirling among groceries and ghosts. A hard man 
with a can of beans - a soft man with the bones of his grand- 
father. For Lee Chong dug into the grave on China Point 
and found the yellow bones, the skull with grey ropy hair 
still sticking to it. And Lee carefully packed the bones, 
femurs, and tibias really straight, skull in the middle, with 
pelvis and clavicle surrounding it and ribs curving on either 
side. Then Lee Chong sent his boxed and brittle grandfather 
over the western sea to lie at last in ground made holy by 
his ancestors. 

Mack and the boys, too, spinning in their orbits. They are 
the Virtues, the Graces, the Beauties of the burned mangled 
craziness of Monterey and the cosmic Monterey where men 
in fear and hunger destroy their stomachs in the fight to 
secure certain food, where men hungering for love destroy 
everything lovable about them. Mack and the boys are the 
Beauties, the Virtues, the Graces. In the world ruled by 
tigers with ulcers, rutted by structured bulls, scavenged by 
blind jackals, Mack and the boys dine delicately with the 
tigers, fondle the frantic heifers, and wrap up the crumbs 
to feed the sea-gulls of Cannery Row. What can it profit a 
man to gain the whole world and to come to his property 
with a gastric ulcer, a blown prostate, and bifocals? Mack 
and the boys avoid the trap, walk around the poison, step 
over the noose while a generation of trapped, poisoned, and 
trussed-up men scream at them and call them no-goods, 
come-to-bad-cnds, blots-on-the-town, thieves, rascals, bums. 



Ill 


Cannery Row 

Our Father who art in nature, who has given the gift of 
survival to the coyote, the common brown rat, the English 
sparrow, the house-fly and the moth, must have a great and 
overwhelming love for no-goods and blots-on-the-town and 
bums, and Mack and the bo>s. Virtues and graces and lazi- 
ness and zest Our Father who art in nature 


CHAPTER III 

Lee Chong’s is to the right of the vacant lot (although 
why it is called vacant when it is piled high with old boilers, 
with rusting pipes, with great square timbers, and stacks of 
five-gallon cans, no one can say). In the rear of the vacant 
lot is the railroad track and the Palace Flophouse. But on 
the left-hand boundary of the lot is the stem and stately 
whore-house of Dora Flood; a decent, clean, honest, old- 
fashioned sporting house where a man can take a glass of 
beer among friends. This is no fly-by-night cheap clip-joint, 
but a sturdy, virtuous club, built, maintained, and disci- 
plined by Dora, who, madam and girl for fifty years, has 
through the exercise of special gifts of tact and honesty, 
charity and a certain realism, made herself respected by the 
intelligent, the learned, and the kind. And by the same token 
she is hated by the twisted and lascivious sisterhood of mar- 
ried spinsters whose husbands respect the home but don’t 
like it very much. 

Dora is a great woman, a great big woman with flaming 
orange hair and a taste for Nile-green evening dresses. She 
keeps an honest, one-price house, sells no hard liquor, and 
permits no loud or vulgar talk in her house. Of her girls 
some are fairly inactive, due to age and infirmities, but Dora 
never puts them aside, although, as she says, some of them 
don’t turn three tricks a month, but they go right on eating 
three meals a day. In a moment of local love Dora named 



112 


Cannery Row 

her place the Bear Flag Restaurant and the stories are many 
of people who have gone in for a sandwich There are nor- 
mally twelve girls m the house, counting the old ones, a 
Greek cook, and a man who is known as a watchman, but 
who undertakes all manner of delicate and dangerous tasks 
He stops fights, ejects drunks, soothes hysteria, cures head- 
aches, and tends bar. He bandages cuts and bruises, passes 
the time of day with cops, and since a good half of the girls 
are Christian Scientists, reads aloud his share of Science and 
Health on a Sunday morning. His predecessor, being a less 
well-balanced man, came to an evil end as shall be reported, 
but Alfred has triumphed over his environment and has 
brought his environment up with him. He knows what men 
should be there and what men shouldn’t be there He knows 
more about the home life of Monterey citizens than anyone 
in town. 

As for Dora - she leads a ticklish existence. Being against 
the law, at least against its letter, she must be twice as law- 
abiding as anyone else. There must be no drunks, no fight- 
ing, no vulgarity, or they close Dora up. Also being illegal 
Dora must be especially philanthropic. Everyone puts the 
bite on her. If the police give a dance for their pension fund 
and everyone else gives a dollar, Dora has to give fifty dol- 
lars. When the Chamber of Commerce improved its gardens, 
the merchants each gave five dollars, but Dora was asked for 
and gave a hundred. With everything else it is the same, 
Red Cross, Community Chest, Boy Scouts, Dora’s unsung, 
unpublicized, shameless dirty wages of sin lead the list of 
donations But during the depression she was hardest hit. In 
addition to the usual charities, Dora saw the hungry chil- 
dren of Cannery Row and the jobless fathers and the worried 
women, and Dora paid grocery bills right and left for two 
years and very nearly went broke in the process. Dora’s girls 
are well trained and pleasant. They never speak to a man 
on the street although he may have been in the night before. 



Cannery Ron 1 13 

Before AIR, the present watchman, took o\er. there was 
a tragedy m the Bear Flag Restaurant which saddened 
everyone, The previous watchman was named William, and 
he was a dark and lonesome-looking man In the day-time 
when his duties were few he would grow tired of female 
company. Through the windows he could see Mack and the 
boys sitting on the pipes in the vacant lot, dangling their 
feet in the mallow weeds and take the sun while they dis- 
coursed slowly and philosophically of matters of interest 
but of no importance. Now and then as he watched them 
he saw them take out a pint of Old Tennis Shoes and wiping 
the neck of the bottle on a sleeve, raise the pint one after 
another And William began to wish he could join that 
good group He walked out one day and sat on the pipe. 
Conversation stopped and an uneasy and hostile&silence fell 
on the group. After a while William went disconsolately 
back to the Bear Flag, and through the -window he saw the 
conversation spring up again, and it saddened him. He had 
a dark and ugly face and a mouth twisted with brooding. 

The next day he went again, and this time he took a pint 
of whisky. Mack and the boys drank the whisky, after all 
they weren’t crazy, but all the talking they did was ‘Good 
luck’, and ‘Lookin’ at you’. 

After a while William went back to the Bear Flag and he 
watched them through the window, and he heard Mack 
raise bis voice saying. ‘But God damn it, I hate a pimp!’ 
Now this was obviously untrue, although William didn’t 
know that. Mack and the boys just didn’t like William. 

Now William’s heart broke The bums would not receive 
him socially. They felt that he was too far beneath them. 
William had always been introspective and self-accusing. 
He put on his hat and walked out along the sea, clear out to 
the Lighthouse. And he stood in the pretty little cemetery 
where you can hear the waves drumming always. William 
thought dark and broody thoughts. No one loved him. No 



1 14 Cannery Row 

one cared about him. They might call him a watchman, but 
he was a pimp - a dirty pimp, the lowest thing in the world. 
And then he thought how he had a right to live and be 
happy just like anyone else, by God he had He walked 
back angrily, but his anger went away when he came to the 
Bear Flag and climbed the steps. It was evening and the 
juke-box was playing Harvest Moon and William remembered 
that the first hooker who ever gaffed for him used to like that 
song before she ran away and got married and disappeared. 
The song made him awfully sad. Dora was in the back 
parlour having a cup of tea when William came in. She said: 
‘What’s the matter, you sick?’ 

‘No,’ said William. ‘But what’s the percentage? I feel 
lousy. I think I’ll bump myself off’ 

Dora had handled plenty of neurotics in her time Kid 
’em out of it was her motto. ‘Well, do it on your own time 
and don’t mess up the rugs,’ she said. 

A grey damp cloud folded over William’s heart and he 
walked slowly out and down the hall and knocked on Eva 
Flanegan’s door. She had red hair and went to confession 
every week. Eva was quite a spiritual girl with a big family 
of brothers and sisters, but she was an unpredictable drunk. 
She was painting her nails and messing them pretty badly 
when William went in and he knew she was bagged and 
Dora wouldn’t let a bagged girl work. Her fingers were nail 
polish to the first joint and she was angry. ‘What’s eating 
you?’ she said. William grew angry too. ‘I’m going to bump 
myself off,’ he said fiercely. 

Eva screeched at him. ‘That’s a dirty, lousy, slinking sin,’ 
she cried, and then: ‘Wouldn’t it be like you to get the 
joint pinched just when I got almost enough kick to take 
a trip to East St Louis. You’re a no-good bastard.’ She was 
still screaming at him when William shut her door after him 
and went to the kitchen. He was very tired of women. The 
Greek would be restful after women. 



Cannery jRcjl 115 

The Greek, big apron, sleeves rolled up, was frying pork- 
chops in two big skillets, turning them over with an ice-pick. 
‘Hello, Kits How is going things? 5 The pork-chops hissed 
and swished m the pan* 

T don’t know, Lou , 5 said William, ‘Sometimes I think 
the best thing to do would be - khickP He drew his finger 
across his throat. 

The Greek laid the ice-pick on the stove and rolled his 
sleeves higher, T tell you what I hear. Kits , 5 he said. T hear 
like the fella talks about it don’t never do it . 5 William’s hand 
went out for the ice-pick and he held it easily m his hand. 
His eyes looked deeply into the Greek’s dark eyes, and he 
saw disbelief and amusement, and then as he stared the 
Greek’s eyes grew troubled and then worried. And William 
saw the change, saw first how the Greek knew he could do 
it and then the Greek knew he would do it As soon as he 
saw that in the Greek’s eyes William knew he had to do it. 
He was sad because now it seemed silly. His hand rose and 
the ice-pick snapped into his heart. It was amazing how 
easily it went in. William was the watchman before Alfred 
came. Everyone liked Alfred He could sit on the pipes with 
Mack and the boys any time. He could even visit up at the 
Palace Flophouse. 


CHAPTER IV 

In the evening just at dusk, a curious thing happened on 
Cannery Row. It happened in the time between sunset and 
the lighting of the street light. There is a small quiet grey 
period then. Down the hull, past the Palace Flophouse, 
down the chicken-walk and through the vacant lot came an 
old Chinaman He wore an ancient flat straw hat, blue 
jeans, both coat and trousers, and heavy shoes of which one 
sole was loose so that it slapped the ground when he walked. 



1 1 6 Cannery Row 

In his hand he carried a covered wicker-basket. His face was 
lean and brown and corded as jerk\ and his old eyes were 
brown, even the whites were brown and deep-set so that 
they looked out of holes. He came by just at dusk and 
crossed the street and went through the opening between 
Western Biological and the Hediondo Cannery Then he 
crossed the little beach and disappeared among the piles and 
steel posts which support the piers. No one saw him again 
until dawn. 

But in the dawn, during that time when the street light 
has been turned off and the daylight has not come, the old 
Chinaman crept out from among the piles, crossed the beach 
and the street. His wicker-basket was heavy and wet and 
dropping now His loose sole flap-flapped on the street. He 
went up the hill to the second street, went through a gate in 
a high board fence and was not seen again until evening. 
People, sleeping, heard his flapping shoe go by and they 
awakened for a moment. It had been happening for years, 
but no one ever got used to him. Some people thought he 
was God and very old people thought he was Death and 
children thought he was a very funny old Chinaman, as 
children always think anything old and strange is fixnny. 
But the children did not taunt him or shout at him as they 
should, for he carried a little cloud of fear about with him. 

Only one brave and beautiful boy of ten named Andy 
from Salinas ever crossed the old Chinaman. Andy was 
visiting in Monterey and he saw the old man and knew he 
must shout at him if only to keep his self-respect, but even 
Andy, brave as he was, felt the little cloud of fear. Andy 
watched him go by evening after evemng, while his duty 
and his terror wrestled. And then one evening Andy braced 
himself and marched behind the old man singing m a shrill 
falsetto: ‘Chixig-Chong Chinaman sitting on a rail - ’Long 
came a white man an’ chopped off his tail,’ 

The old man stopped and turned, Andy stopped. The 



Cannery Row 1 17 

deep-brown eyes looked at Andy and the thin corded lips 
moved. What happened then Andy was never able either 
to explain or to forget. For the eyes spread out until there 
was no Chinaman, And then it was one eye - one huge 
brown eye as big as a church door. Andy looked through 
the shiny transparent brown door and through it he saw a 
lonely countryside, flat for miles but ending against a row 
of fantastic mountains shaped like cows’ and dogs’ heads 
and tents and mushrooms. There was low coarse grass on 
the plain and here and there a little mound. And a small 
animal like a woodchuck sat on each mound. And the lone- 
liness — the desolate cold aloneness of the landscape made 
Andy whimper because there wasn’t anybody at all in the 
world and he was left. Andy shut his eyes so he wouldn’t 
have to see it any more and when he opened them, he was in 
Cannery Row and the old Chinaman was just flip-flapping 
between Western Biological and the Hediondo Cannery. 
Andy was the only boy who ever did that and he never did 
it again. 


CHAPTER V 

Western Biological was right across the street and 
facing the vacant lot. Lee Chong’s grocery was on its catty- 
comer right and Dora’s Bear Flag Restaurant was on its 
catty- cprner left. Western Biological deals in strange and 
beautiful wares. It sells the lovely animals of the sea, the 
sponges, tumcates, anemones, the stars and buttlestars, and 
sun stars, the bivalves, barnacles, the worm and shells, the 
fabulous and multiform little brothers, the living moving 
flowers of the sea, nudibranchs and tectibranchs, the spiked 
and nobbed and needy urchins, the crabs and demi-crabs, 
the little dragoons, the snapping shrimps, and ghost shrimps 
so transparent that they hardly throw a shadow. And 
Western Biological sells bugs and snails and spiders, and 



Xi8 Cannery Row 

rattlesnakes, and rats, and honey bees and gila monsters. 
These are all for sale Then there are little unborn humans, 
some whole and others sliced thin and mounted on slides. 
And for students there are sharks with the blood drained 
out and yellow and blue colour substituted in veins and 
arteries, so that you may follow the systems with a scalpel. 
And there are cats with coloured veins and arteries, and 
frogs the same. You can order anything living from Western 
Biological and sooner or later you will get it. 

It is a low building facing the street. The basement is 
the store-room with shelves, shelves clear to the ceiling, 
loaded with jars of preserved animals. And in the basement 
is a sink and instrument for embalming and for injecting. 
Then you go through the backyard to a covered shed on 
piles over the ocean and here are the tanks for the larger 
animals, the sharks and rays and octopi, each in their con- 
crete tanks. There is a stairway up the front of the building 
and a door that opens into an office where there is a desk 
piled high with unopened mail, filing cabinets, and a safe 
with the door propped open Once the safe got locked by 
rpistake and no one knew the combination. And in the safe 
was an open can of sardines and a piece of Roquefort cheese. 
Before the combination could be sent by the maker of the 
lock, there was trouble in the safe It was then that Doc 
devised a method for getting revenge on a bank if anyone 
should ever want to. ‘Rent a safety-deposit box/ hp said, 
‘then deposit in it one whole fresh salmon and go away for 
six months . 3 After the trouble with the safe, it was not 
permitted to keep food there any more. It is kept in the 
filing cabinets. Behind the office is a room where in aquaria 
are many living animals; there are also the microscopes and 
the slides and the drug cabinets, the cases of laboratory glass, 
the work benches and little motors, the chemicals. From 
this room comes smells - formaline, and dry starfish, and 
sea water and menthol, carbolic acid and acetic acid, smell 



Cannery Rou 119 

of brown wrapping-paper and straw and rope* smell of 
chloroform and ether, smell of ozone from the motors, smell 
of fine steel and thin lubricant from the microscopes, smell 
of banana oil and rubber tubing, smell of drying wool socks 
and boots, sharp pungent smell of rattlesnakes, and musty 
frightening smell of rats. And through the back door comes 
the smell of kelp and barnacles when the tide is out and the 
smell of salt and spray when the tide is in. 

To the left the office opens into a library. The walls are 
bookcases to the ceiling, boxes of pamphlets and separates, 
books of all kinds, dictionaries, encyclopaedias, poetry, plays. 
A great phonograph stands against the wall with hundreds 
of records lined up beside it. Under the window is a red- 
wood bed and on the walls and to the bookcases are pinned 
reproductions of Daumiers, and Graham, Titian, and 
Leonardo and Picasso, Dali and George Grosz, pinned here 
and there at eye level, so that you can look at them if you 
want to. There are chairs and benches m this little room 
and of course the bed. As many as forty people have been 
here at one time. 

Behind this library or music-room, or whatever you want 
to call it, is the kitchen, a narrow chamber with a gas-stove, 
a water-heater, and a sink. But whereas some food is kept 
in the filing cabinets in the office, dishes and cooking fat and 
vegetables are kept in glass-fronted sectional bookcases in the 
kitchen. No whimsy dictated this. It just happened. From 
the ceiling of the kitchen hang pieces of bacon, and salami, 
and black beche-de-mer. Behind the kitchen is a toilet and 
a shower. The toilet leaked for five years until a clever and 
handsome guest fixed it with a piece of chewing-gum. 

Doc is the owner and operator of the Western Biological 
Laboratory. Doc is rather small, deceptively small, for he 
is wiry and very strong and when passionate anger comes on 
him he can be very fierce. He wears a beard and his face is 
half Christ and half satyr and his face tells the truth. It 



120 Cannery Row 

is said that he has helped many a girl out of one trouble 
and into another. Doc has the hands of a brain surgeon* and 
a cool warm mind. Doc tips his hat to dogs as he drives by 
and the dogs look up and smile at him. He can kill any- 
thing for need* but he could not even hurt a feeling for 
pleasure He has one great fear - that of getting his head 
wet* so that summer or winter he ordinarily wears a rain 
hat He will wade m a tide pool up to the chest without 
feeling damp* but a drop of rain water on his head makes 
him panicky 

Over a period of years Doc dug himself into Cannery Row 
to an extent not even he suspected. He became the fountain 
of philosophy and science and art. In the laboratory the 
girls from Dora’s heard the Plain Songs and Gregorian 
music for the first time. Lee Chong listened while Li Po was 
read to him m English. Henri the painter heard for the 
first time the Book of the Dead and was so moved that he 
changed his medium. Henri had been painting with glue* 
iron rust* and coloured chicken feathers, but he changed 
and his next four paintings were done entirely with different 
kinds of nutshells. Doc would listen to any kind of nonsense 
and change it for you to a kind of wisdom. His mind had 
no horizon - and his sympathy had no warp. He could talk 
to children, telling them very profound things so that they 
understood. He lived in a world of wonders* of excitement. 
He was concupiscent as a rabbit and gentle as hell Every- 
one who knew him was indebted to him. And everyone who 
thought of him thought next: T really must do something 
nice for Doc.’ 


CHAPTER VI 

Doc was collecting marine animals in the Great Tide Pool 
on the tip of the Peninsula. It is a fabulous place; when the 
tide is in* a wave-churned basin* creamy with foam* whipped 



Cannery Rozt 1 2 1 

by the combers that roll in from the whistling buoy on the 
reef. But when the tide goes out the little water world 
becomes quiet and lovely. The sea is very clear and the 
bottom becomes fantastic with hurrying, fighting, feeding, 
breeding animals Grabs rush from frond to frond of the 
waving algae. Starfish squat over mussels and limpets, attach 
their million little suckers and then slowly lift with incredible 
power until the prey is broken from the rock And then the 
starfish stomach comes out and envelops its food Orange 
and speckled and fluted nudibranchs slide gracefully over 
the rocks, their skirts waving like the dresses of Spanish 
dancers. And black eels poke their heads out of crevices 
and wait for prey. The snapping shrimps with their trigger 
claws pop loudly. The lovely, coloured world is glassed over. 
Hermit crabs like frantic children scamper on the bottom 
sand And now one, finding an empty snail shell he likes 
better than his own, creeps out, exposing his soft body to the 
enemy for a moment, and then pops into the new shell. A 
wave breaks over the barrier, and churns the glassy water 
for a moment and mixes bubbles into the pool, and then it 
clears and is tranquil and lovely and murderous again. Here 
a crab tears a leg from his brother. The anemones expand 
like soft and brilliant flowers, inviting any tired and per- 
plexed animal to lie for a moment in their arms, and when 
some small crab or little tide-pool Johnnie accepts the green 
and purple invitation, the petals whip in, the stinging cells 
shoot tiny narcotic needles into the prey and it grows weak 
and perhaps sleepy while the searing caustic digestive acids 
melt its body down. 

Then the creeping murderer, the octopus, steals out, 
slowly, softly, moving like a grey mist, pretending now to be 
a bit of weed, now a rock, now a lump of decaying meat, 
while its evil goat eyes watch coldly. It oozes and flows 
toward a feeding crab, and as it comes close its yellow eyes 
bum and its body turns rosy with the pulsing colour of 



122 Cannery Row 

anticipation and rage. Then suddenly it runs lightly on the 
tip of its arms, as ferociously as a charging cat. It leaps 
savagely on the crab, there is a puff of black fluid, and the 
straggling mass is obscured m the sepia cloud while the 
octopus murders the crab. On the exposed rocks out of 
water, the barnacles bubble behind their closed doors and 
the limpets dry out. And down to the rocks come the black 
flies to eat anything they can find. The sharp smell of iodine 
from the algae, and the lime smell of calcareous bodies and 
the smell of powerful protean, smell of sperm and ova fill 
the air. On the exposed rocks the starfish emit semen and 
eggs from between their rays. The smells of life and rich- 
ness, of death and digestion, of decay and birth, burden the 
air. And salt spray blows in from the barrier where the 
ocean waits for its rising-tide strength to permit it back into 
the Great Tide Pool again. And on the roof the whistling 
buoy bellows like a sad and patient bull. 

In the pool Doc and Hazel worked together. Hazel lived 
in the Palace Flophouse with Mack and the boys. Hazel got 
his name in as haphazard a way as his life was ever after- 
ward. His worried mother had had seven children in eight 
years. Hazel was the eighth, and his mother became con- 
fused about his sex when he was born. She was tired and 
run down anyway from trying to feed and clothe seven 
children and their father. She had tried every possible way 
of making money - paper flowers, mushrooms at home, rab- 
bits for meat and fur - while her husband from a canvas 
chair gave her every help his advice and reasoning and 
criticism could offer. She had a great aunt named Hazel 
who was reputed to cany life insurance. The eighth child 
was named Hazel before the mother got it through her head 
that Hazel was a boy and by that time she was used to the 
name and never bothered to change it. Hazel grew up — did 
four years in grammar school, four years in reform school, 
and didn’t learn anything in either place. Reform schools 



Cannery Ron 1 23 

are supposed to teach viciousness and criminality, but Hazel 
didn’t pay enough attention. He came out of reform school 
as innocent of viciousness as he was of fractions and long 
division Hazel loved to hear conversation but he didn’t 
listen to words - just to the tone of conversation. He asked 
questions, not to hear the answers but simply to continue 
the flow. He was twenty-six — dark-haired and pleasant, 
strong, willing, and loyal Quite often he went collecting 
with Doc and he was very good at it once he knew what was 
wanted His fingers would creep like an octopus, could 
grab and hold like an anemone. He was sure-footed on the 
slippery rocks and he loved the hunt. Doc wore his rain hat 
and high rubber-boots as he worked, but Hazel sloshed 
about in tennis-shoes and blue jeans. They were collecting 
starfish. Doc had an order for three hundred. 

Hazel picked a nobby purplish starfish from the bottom 
of the pool and popped it into his nearly-fuil gunny sack. 
T wonder what they do with them/ he said. 

‘Do with what?’ Doc asked. 

‘The starfish/ said Hazel. ‘You sell ’em. You’ll send out 
a barrel of ’em. What do the guys do with ’em? You can’t 
eat ’em.’ 

‘They study them/ said Doc patiently and he remem- 
bered that he had answered this question for Hazel dozens 
of times before. But Doc had one mental habit he could not 
get over* When anyone asked a question, Doc thought he 
wanted to know the answer. That was the way with Doc. 
He never asked unless he wanted to know and he could not 
conceive of the brain that would ask without wanting to 
know. But Hazel, who simply wanted to hear talk, had de- 
veloped a system of making the answer to one question the 
basis of another. It kept conversation going. 

‘What do they find to study?’ Hazel continued. ‘They’re 
just starfish. There’s millions of ’em around. I could get you 
a million of ’em.’ 



124 Cannery Row 

"They’re complicated and interesting animals/ Doc said 
a little defensively, "Besides, these are going to the Middle 
West to Northwestern University ’ 

Hazel used his trick. "They got no starfish there?’ 

"They got no ocean there/ said Doc. 

"Oh!’ said Hazel and he cast frantically about for a peg 
to hang a new question on He hated to have a conversation 
die out like this He wasn’t quick enough. While he was 
looking for a question Doc asked one. Hazel hated that, it 
meant casting about in his mind for an answer and casting 
about in Hazel’s mind was like wandering alone m a de- 
serted museum Hazel’s mind was choked with uncatalogued 
exhibits He never forgot anything, but he never bothered 
to arrange his memories. Everything was thrown together 
like fishing-tackle m the bottom of a rowboat, hooks and 
sinkers and line and lures and gaffs all snarled up 

Doc asked; "How are things going up at the Palace?’ 

Hazel ran his fingers through his dark hair and he peered 
into the clutter of his mind "Pretty good/ he said. "That 
fellow Gay is moving in with us, I guess. His wife hits him 
pretty bad. He don’t mind that when he’s awake, but she 
waits ’til he gets to sleep and then hits him. He hates that. 
He has to wake up and beat her up and then when he goes 
back to sleep she hits him again. He don’t get any rest, so 
he’s moving in with us.’ 

"That’s a new one/ said Doc. "She used to swear, out a 
warrant and put him in jail.’ 

"Yeah!’ said Hazel. "But that was before they built the 
new jail in Salinas. Used to be thirty days and Gay was 
pretty hot to get out, but this new jail - radio in the tank 
and good bunks and the sheriff’s a nice fellow. Gay gets in 
there and he don’t want to come out. He likes it so much 
his wife won’t get him arrested any more. So she figured 
out this hitting him while he’s asleep. It’s nerve racking, he 
says. And you know as good as me — Gay never did take any 



Cannery Row 225 

pleasure in beating her up. He only done it to keep his self- 
respect. But he gets tired of it. I guess he’ll be with us now.* 

Doc straightened up. The waves were beginning to break 
over the barrier of the Great Tide Pool. The tide was coming 
in and little rivers from the sea had begun to flow over the 
rocks The wand blew freshly in from the whistling buoy 
and the barking sea-lions came from around the point. Doc 
pushed his rain hat on the back of his head. 'We’ve got 
enough starfish/ he said and then w r ent on: ‘Look, Hazel, 
I know you’ve got six or seven undersized abalones in the 
bottom of your sack. If w r e get stopped by a game warden, 
you’re going to say they’re mine, on my permit - aren’t 
you?’ 

'WeH - hen/ said Hazel. 

'Look/ Doc said kindly. ‘Suppose I get an order for 
abalones and maybe the game warden thinks I’m using my 
collecting permit too often. Suppose he thinks I’m eating 
them.’ 

‘Well - hell/ said Hazel. 

'It’s like the industrial alcohol board. They’ve got sus- 
picious minds They always think I’m drinking the alcohol. 
They think that about everyone ’ 

'W e U, ain’t you?’ 

'Not much of it/ said Doc. 'That stuff they put in it 
tastes terrible and it’s a big job to re-distil it. 9 

'That stuff ain’t so bad/ said Hazel. 'Me and Mack had 
a snort at it the other day. What is it they put m?’ 

Doc was about to answer when he saw it was Hazel’s trick 
again. 'Let’s get moving/ he said. He hoisted his sack of 
starfish on his shoulder. And he had forgotten the iUegal 
abalones in the bottom of Hazel’s sack. 

Hazel foUowed him up out of the tide pool and up the 
slippery trail to soHd ground. The little crabs scampered and 
skittered out of their way. Hazel felt that he had better 
cement the grave over the topic of the abalones. 



126 Cannery Row 

‘That painter guy came back to the Palace/ he offered. 

‘Yes?* said Doc. 

‘Yeah! You see, he done all our pictures in chicken- 
feathers and now he says he got to do them all over again 
with nut-shells. He says he changed his -his med - medium.* 

Doc chuckled. ‘He still building his boat?’ 

‘Sure/ said Hazel. ‘He’s got it all changed around. New 
kind of a boat. I guess he’ll take it apart and change it. Doc 
- is he nuts?* 

Doc swung his heavy sack of starfish to the ground and 
stood panting a little. ‘Nuts?’ he asked ‘Oh, yes, I guess 
so. Nuts about the same amount we are, only in a different 
way.* 

Such a thing had never occurred to Hazel. He looked 
upon himself as a crystal pool of clarity and on his life as a 
troubled glass of misunderstood virtue Doc’s last statement 
had outraged him a little. ‘But the boat ...’ he cried. ‘He’s 
been building that boat for seven years that I know of. 
The blocks rotted out and he made concrete blocks. Every 
time he gets it nearly finished he changes it and starts over 
again. I think he’s nuts. Seven years on a boat. 9 

Doc was sitting on the ground pulling off his rubber boots. 
‘You don’t understand/ he said gently. ‘Henri loves boats, 
but he’s afraid of the ocean.’ 

‘What’s he want a boat for then? 5 Hazel demanded. 

‘He likes boats/ said Doc. ‘But suppose he finishes his 
boat. Once it’s finished people will say: “Why don’t you put 
it in the water?” Then if he puts it in the water, he’ll have 
to go out in it, and he hates the water. So you see, he never 
finishes the boat — so he doesn’t ever have to launch it.* 

Hazel had followed this reasoning to a certain point, but 
he abandoned it before it was resolved, not only abandoned 
it but searched for some way to change the subject. ‘I think 
he’s nuts,’ he said lamely. 

On the black earth on which the ice-plants bloomed. 



Cannery Row 127 

hundreds of black stink bugs crawled. And many of them 
stuck their tails up in the air. ‘Look at all them stink bugs/ 
Hazel remarked, grateful to the bugs for being there. 

‘They’re interesting/ said Doc. 

‘Well, what they got their asses up in the air for? 5 

Doc rolled up his wool socks and put them m the rubber- 
boots and from his pocket he brought out dry socks and 
a pair of thin moccasins. ‘I don’t know why/ he said. ‘I 
looked them up recently - they’re very common animals and 
one of the commonest things they do is put their tails up 
in the air. And in all the books there isn’t one mention of 
the fact that they put their tails up in the air or why.’ 

Hazel turned one of the stink bugs over with the toe of 
his wet tennis-shoe and the shining black beetle strove madly 
with floundering legs to get upright again. *W ell, why do you 
think they do it?’ 

‘I think they’re praying/ said Doc. 

‘What!’ Hazel was shocked. 

‘The remarkable thing,’ said Doc, ‘isn’t that they put 
their tails up in the air - the really incredible remarkable 
thing is that we find it remarkable. We can only use our- 
selves as yardsticks. If we did something as inexplicable 
and strange we’d probably be praying - so maybe they’re 
praying.’ 

‘Let’s get the hell out of here/ said Hazel. 


CHAPTER VII 

The Palace Flophouse was no sudden development. Indeed 
when Mack and Hazel and Eddie and Hughie and Jones 
moved into it, they looked upon it as little more than shelter 
from the wind and the rain, as a place to go when everything 
else had closed or when their welcome was thin and sore 
with over-use. Then the Palace was only a long bare room. 



128 Cannery Row 

Et dimly by two small windows, walled with unpainted 
wood smelling strongly of fish meal They had not loved it 
then. But Mack knew that some kind of organization was 
necessary, particularly among such a group of ravening 
Individualists* 

A training army which has not been equipped with guns 
and artillery and tanks uses artificial guns and masquer- 
ading trucks to simulate its destructive panoply - and its 
toughening soldiers get used to field-guns by handling logs 
on wheels. 

Mack, with a piece of chalk, drew five oblongson the floor, 
each seven feet long and four feet wide, and in each square 
he wrote a name. These were the simulated beds. Each 
man had property rights inviolable m his space. He could 
legally fight a man who encroached on his square. The rest 
of the room was property common to all. That was m the 
first days when Mack and the boys sat on the floor, played 
cards hunkered down, and slept on the hard boards Per- 
haps, save for an accident of weather, they might always 
have lived that way. However, an unprecedented rainfall 
which went on for over a month changed all that. House- 
ridden, the boys grew tired of squatting on the floor. Their 
eyes became outraged by the bare board walls. Because it 
sheltered them the house grew dear to them And it had the 
charm of never knowing the entrance of an outraged land- 
lord. For Lee Chong never came near it. Then one^ after- 
noon Hughle came in with an army cot which had a tom 
canvas. He spent two hours sewing up the rip with fishing- 
Ene. And that night the others lying on the floor m their 
squares watched Hughie ooze gracefully into his cot - they 
heard him sigh with abysmal comfort and he was asleep and 
snoring before anyone else. 

The next day Mack .puffed up the hill carrying a rusty 
set of springs he had found on a scrap-iron dump. The 
apathy was broken then. The boys outdid one another in 



Cannery Raw 1 29 

beautifying the Palace Flophouse until after a few months 
it was, if anything, over-furnished There were old carpets 
on the floor, chairs with and without seats. Mack had a 
wicker chaise-longue painted bright red There were tables, 
a grandfather clock without dial face or works. The walls 
were whitewashed, which made it almost light and airy. 
Pictures began to appear - mostly calendars showing im- 
probable luscious blondes holding botdes of Coca-Gonx. 
Henri had contributed two pieces from his chicken-feather 
period. A bundle of gilded cat-tails stood in one comer ‘and 
a sheaf of peacock-feathers was nailed to the wall beside the 
grandfather clock. 

They were some time acquiring a stove and when they 
did find what they wanted, a silver-scrolled monster with 
floriated warming ovens and a front like a nickel-plated 
tulip garden, they had trouble getting it. It was too big to 
steal and its owner refused to part with it to the sick widow 
with eight children whom Mack invented and patronized m 
the same moment The owner wanted a dollar and a half 
and didn’t come down to eighty cents for three days. The 
boys closed at eighty cents and gave him an IOU, which he 
probably still has This transaction took place m Seaside 
and the stove weighed three hundred pounds. Mack and 
Hughie exhausted every possibility of haulage for ten days 
and only when they realized that no one was going to take 
this stove home for them did they begin to carry it. It took 
them three days to carry it to Cannery Row, a distance of 
five miles, and they camped beside it at night. But once in- 
stalled in the Palace Flophouse it was the glory and the 
hearth and the centre. Its nickel flowers and foliage shone 
with a cheery light. It was the gold tooth of the Palace. 
Fired up, it warmed the big room. Its oven was wonderful 
and you could fry an egg on its shiny black lids 

With the great stove came pride, and with pride, the 
Palace became home. Eddie planted morning glories to run 



130 Cannery Row 

over the door and Hazel acquired some rather rare fuchsia- 
bushes planted in five-gallon cans which made the entrance 
formal and a little cluttered. Mack and the boys loved the 
Palace and they even cleaned it a little sometimes. In their 
minds they sneered at unsettled people who had no house to 
go to and occasionally in their pride they brought a guest 
home for a day or two. 

Eddie was understudy bar-tender at c La Ida’. He filled 
in when Whitey the regular bar- tender was sick, which was 
as often as Whitey could get away with it. Every time Eddie 
filled m, a few bottles disappeared, so he couldn’t fill m too 
often. But Whitey liked to have Eddie take his place because 
he was convinced, and correctly, that Eddie was one man 
who wouldn’t try to keep his job permanently. Almost any- 
one could have trusted Eddie to this extent. Eddie didn’t 
have to remove much liquor. He kept a gallon jug under 
the bar and in the mouth of the jug there was a funnel Any- 
thing left in the glasses Eddie poured into the funnel before 
he washed the glasses. If an argument or a song were going 
on at ‘La Ida’, or late at night when good fellowship had 
reached its logical conclusion, Eddie poured glasses half- or 
two-thirds full into the funnel. The resulting punch which 
he took back to the Palace was always interesting and some- 
times surprising. The mixture of rye, beer, bourbon, Scotch, 
wine, rum, and gin was fairly constant, but now and then 
some effete customer would order a stinger or an anisette 
or a curagao and these little touches gave a distinct charac- 
ter to the punch. It was Eddie’s habit always to shake a little 
Angostura into the jug before he left. On a good night 
Eddie got three-quarters of a gallon. It was a source of 
satisfaction to him that nobody was out anything He had 
observed that a man got just as drunk on half a glass as on 
a whole one, that is, if he was in the mood to get drunk 
at all. 

Eddie was a very desirable inhabitant of the Palace 



Cannery Row 13 1 

Flophouse. The others never asked him to help with the 
house-cleaning and once Hazel washed four pairs of Eddie’s 
socks 

Now on the afternoon when Hazel was out collecting 
with Doc in the Great Tide Pool* the boys were sitting 
around m the Palace sipping the result of Eddie’s latest 
contribution. Gay was there too, the latest member of 
the group. Eddie sipped speculatively from his glass and 
smacked his hps ‘It’s funny how you get a run,’ he said. 
‘Take last night. There was at least ten guys ordered Man- 
hattan. Sometimes maybe you don’t get two calls for a 
Manhattan in a month. It’s the grenadine gives the stuff 
that taste ’ 

Mack tasted his - a big taste - and refilled his glass. ‘Yes/ 
he said sombrely, ‘it’s little things make the difference. 9 He 
looked about to see how this gem had set with the others. 

Only Gay got the full impact. ‘Sure is/ he said. ‘Does ../ 

‘Where’s Hazel to-day?’ Mack asked. 

Jones said. ‘Hazel went out with Doc to get some star- 
fish.’ 

Mack nodded his head soberly. ‘That Doc is a hell of a 
nice fella,’ he said ‘He’ll give you a quarter any time. 
When I cut myself he put on a new bandage every day. A 
hell of a mce fella.’ 

The others nodded in profound agreement. 

‘I been wondering for a long time,’ Mack continued, 
‘what we could do for him — something nice. Something 
he’d like.’ 

‘He’d like a dame/ said Hughie. 

‘He’s got three four dames,’ said Jones. ‘You can always 
tell — when he pulls them front curtains closed and when he 
plays that kind of church music on the phonograph.’ 

Mack said reprovingly to Hughie: ‘Just because he 
doesn’t run no dame naked through the streets in the day- 
time, you think Doc’s celebrate.’ 



132 Cannery Row 

‘What’s celebrate?’ Eddie asked. 

‘That’s when yon can’t get no dame/ said Mack. 

T thought it was a kind of party/ said Jones. 

A silence fell on the room Mack shifted m his chaise- 
longue. Hughie let the front legs of his chair down on the 
floor. They looked into space and then they all looked at 
Mack. Mack said: c Hum p 

Eddie said: ‘What kind of a party you think Doc’d like?’ 

‘What other kind is there?’ said Jones 

Mack mused ‘Doc wouldn’t like this stuff from the wimn } 

jug - 5 

‘How do you know?’ Hughie demanded ‘You never 
offered him none 5 

‘Oh, I know/ said Mack. ‘He’s been to college. Once 
I seen a dame m a fur coat go m there. Never did see her 
come out. It was two o’clock the last I looked — and that 
church music goin’. No — you couldn’t offer him none of 
this ’ He filled his glass again. 

‘This tastes pretty mce after the third glass/ Hughie said 
loyally. 

‘No,’ said Mack. ‘Not for Doc. Have to be whisky - the 
real thing.’ 

‘He likes beer/ said Jones. ‘He’s all the time going over 
to Lee’s for beer — sometimes in the middle of the night ’ 

Mack said: ‘I figure when you buy beer, you’re buying 
too much tare. Take 8 per cent beer - why you’re spending 
your dough for 92 per cent water and colour and hops and 
stuff like that. Eddie/ he added, ‘you think you could get 
four five bottles of whisky at “La Ida” next time Whitey’s 
sick?’ 

‘Sure/ said Eddie ‘Sure I could get it, but that’d be the 
end — no more golden eggs. I think Johnnie’s suspicious any- 
ways. Other day he says: “I smell a mouse named Eddie.” 
I was gonna lay low and only bring the jug for a while.’ 

‘Yeah!’ said Jones. ‘Don’t you lose that job. If something 



Cannery Ron 133 

happened to Whitev, you could fall right m there for a 
week or so ’til they got somebody else. I guess if we're goin 9 
to give a party for Doc, we got to buy the whisky How 
much is whisky a gallon? 5 

T don’t know, 3 said Hughie. ‘I never get more than a 
half-pmt at a time myself — at one time that is. I figure you 
get a quart and right away you got friends But you get a 
half-pint and you can drink it in the lot before — well before 
you got a lot of folks around 3 

‘It’s going to take dough to give Doc a party, 9 said Mack. 
‘If we’re going to give him a party’ at all it ought to be a 
good one Should have a big cake. I wonder when is his 
birthday? 3 

£ Don 3 t need a birthday for a party, 5 said Jones. 

c No — but it’s nice, 3 said Mack ‘I figure it would take 
ten or twelve bucks to give Doc a party you wouldn’t be 
ashamed of 3 

They looked at one another speculatively Hughie sug- 
gested. ‘The Hediondo Cannery is hiring guys 3 

‘No, 9 said Mack quickly. ‘We got good reputations and 
we don’t want to spoil them Every one of us keeps a job for 
a month or more when we take one. That’s why we can 
always get a job when we need one S’pose we take a job for 
a day or so - why we’ll lose our reputation for sticking. Then 
if we needed a job there wouldn’t nobody have us. 9 The rest 
nodded quick agreement 

T figure I’m gonna work a couple of months — November 
and part of December,’ said Jones. ‘Makes it nice to have 
money around Christmas We could cook a turkey this year 3 

‘By God, we could,’ said Mack. ‘I know a place up Car- 
mel Valley where there’s fifteen hundred m one flock. 9 

‘Valley/ said Hughie. ‘You know I used to collect stuff 
up the Valley for Doc, turtles and crayfish and frogs. Got 
a nickel apiece for frogs.’ 

‘Me, too/ said Gay. ‘I got five hundred frogs one time.’ 



1 34 Cannery Row 

Tf Doc needs frogs it’s a set-up/ said Mack ‘We could 
go up the Carmel River and have a little outing and we 
wouldn't tell Doc what it was for and then we'd give him 
one hell of a party 5 

A quiet excitement grew in the Palace Flophouse. ‘Gay/ 
said Mack, ‘take a look out the door and see if Doc's car is in 
front of his place 5 

Gay set down his glass and looked out. ‘Not yet/ he said. 

‘Well, he ought to be back any minute/ said Mack. ‘Now 
here’s how well go about it . 

CHAPTER VIII 

In April, 1932, the boiler at the Hediondo Cannery blew 
a tube for the third time in two weeks and the board of 
directors, consisting of Mr Randolph and a stenographer, 
decided that it would be cheaper to buy a new boiler than 
to have to shut down so often. In time the new boiler ar- 
rived and the old one was moved into the vacant lot be- 
tween Lee Chong’s and the Bear Flag Restaurant, where it 
was set on blocks to await an inspiration on Mr Randolph’s 
part on how to make some money out of it. Gradually, the 
plant engineer removed the tubing to use to patch other 
out-worn equipment at the Hediondo. The boiler looked 
like an old-fashioned locomotive without wheels. It^had a 
big door in the centre of its nose and a low fire door. 
Gradually, it became red and soft with rust and gradually 
the mallow weeds grew up around it and the flaking rust fed 
the weeds. Flowering myrtle crept up its sides and the wild 
anise perfumed the air about it. Then someone threw out a 
datura root and the thick fleshy tree grew up and the great 
white bells hung down over the boiler door and at night the 
flowers smelled of love and excitement, an incredibly sweet 
and moving odour. 



Cannery Row 135 

In 1935 Mr and Mrs Sam Malloy moved into the boiler 
The tufomg was all gone now and it was a roomy, dry and 
safe apartment True, if you came in through the fire door 
you had to get down on your hands and knees, but once in 
there was head room m the middle and you couldn’t want 
a dryer, warmer place to stay They shagged a mattress 
through the fire door and settled down. Mr Malloy was 
happy and contented there and for quite a long time so was 
Mrs Malloy 

Below the boiler on the hill there were numbers of large 
pipes also abandoned by the Hediondo. Toward the end of 
1937 there was a great catch of fish and the canneries were 
working full time and a housing shortage occurred. Then it 
was that Mr Malloy took to renting the larger pipes as sleep- 
ing-quarters for single men at a very nominal fee. With a 
piece of tar paper over one end and a square of carpet over 
the other, they made comfortable bedrooms, although men 
used to sleeping curled up had to change their habits or 
move out. There were those too who claimed that their 
snores echoing back from the pipes woke them up. But on the 
whole Mr Malloy did a steady small business and was happy. 

Mrs Malloy had been contented until her husband became 
a landlord and then she began to change. First it was a rug, 
then a wash-tub, then a lamp with a coloured silk shade. 
Finally, she came into the boiler on her hands and knees 
one day and she stood up and said a little breathlessly: 
‘Holman’s are having a sale of curtains. Real lace curtains 
and edges of blue and pink — $ 1 98 a set with curtain rods 
thrown in 5 

Mr Malloy sat up on the mattress. ‘Curtains?’ he de- 
manded ‘What in God’s name do you want curtains for?’ 

‘I like things nice,’ said Mrs Malloy. ‘I always did like to 
have things mce for you,’ and her lower lip began to tremble. 

‘But, darling,’ Sam Malloy cried, ‘I got nothing against 
curtains I like curtains.’ 



x 36 Cannery Row 

‘Only $1.98/ Mrs Malloy quavered, ‘and you begrutch 
me $1.98/ and she sniffled and her chest heaved 

‘I don't begrutch you/ said Mr Malloy. ‘But, darling -for 
Christ’s sake what are we going to do with curtains? We got 
no windows. 5 

Mrs Malloy cried and cried and Sam held her m his arms 
and comforted her 

‘Men just don’t understand how a woman feels, 5 she 
sobbed. ‘Men just never try to put themselves in a woman’s 
place 5 

And Sam lay beside her and rubbed her back for a long 
time before she went to sleep. 


CHAPTER IX 

When Doc’s car came back to the laboratory, Mack and 
the boys secretly watched Hazel help to carry m the sacks 
of starfish. In a few minutes Hazel came damply up the 
chicken- walk to the Palace. His jeans were wet with sea 
water to the thighs and where it was drying the white salt 
rings were forming. He sat heavily in the patient rocker 
that was his and shucked off his wet tenms shoes. 

Mack asked: ‘How is Doc feeling? 5 

‘Fine/ said Hazel. ‘You can’t understand a word he says. 
Know what he said about stink bugs? No - I better npt tell 
you 5 

‘He seem in a nice friendly mood?’ Mack asked. 

‘Sure/ said Hazel ‘We got two three hundred starfish 
He’s all right/ 

‘I wonder if we better all go over? 5 Mack asked himself 
and he answered himself: ‘No, I guess it would be better if 
one went alone. It might get him mixed up if we all went/ 

‘What is this? 5 Hazel asked. 

‘We got plans/ said Mack. ‘I’ll go myself so as not to 



Cannery Ron 137 

stai tie him* You guys stay here and wait 111 come back in 
a few minutes. 3 

Mack went out and he teetered down the chicken-walk 
and across the track. Mr Malloy was sitting on a brick in 
front of his boiler 

"How are you, Sam? 5 Mack asked 

"Pretty good 3 

‘How’s the missus^ 5 

"Pretty good/ said Mr Malloy "You know any kind of 
glue that you can stick cloth to iron? 5 

Ordinarily, Mack w ould have thrown himself headlong into 
this problem, but now he was not to be deflected "No/ he said. 

He went across the vacant lot, crossed the street and en- 
tered the basement of the laboratory 

Doc had his hat off now, since there w r as practically no 
chance of getting his head wet unless a pipe broke. He was 
busy removing the starfish from the wet sacks and arranging 
them on the cool concrete floor The starfish were twisted 
and knotted up, for a starfish loves to hang on to something 
and for an hour these had found only each other. Doc ar- 
ranged them m long lines and very slowly they straightened 
out until they lay in symmetrical stars on the concrete floor. 
Doc 5 s pointed brown beard was damp with perspiration as 
he worked. He looked up a little nervously as Mack entered. 
It was not that trouble always came in with Mack, but some- 
thing .always entered with him, 

"Hiya, Doc? 5 said Mack. 

"All right/ said Doc uneasily. 

"Hear about Phyllis Mae over at the Bear Flag? She hit 
a drunk and got his tooth in her fist and it 5 s infected clear 
to the elbow. She showed me the tooth. It was out of a plate. 
Is a false-tooth poison, Doc? 5 

"I guess everything that comes out the human mouth is of 
poison/ said Doc wamingfully, "Has she got a doctor? 5 

"The bouncer fixed her up, 5 said Mack. 



138 Cannery Row 

"Pll take her some sulfa/ said Doc, and he waited for the 
storm to break He knew Mack had come for something and 
Mack knew he knew it. 

Mack said "Doc, you got any need for any kind of ani- 
mals now? 5 

Doc sighed with relief. "Why? 5 he asked guardedly 

Mack became open and confidential "Pll tell you. Doc 
I and the boys got to get some dough - we simply got to. It 5 s 
for a good purpose, you might say a worthy cause. 5 

"Phyllis Mae 5 s arm? 5 

Mack saw the chance, weighed it and gave it up. "Well - 
no, 5 he said. "It 5 s more important than that. You can 5 t kill 
a whore. No - this is different. I and the boys thought if' you 
needed something why we’d get it for you and that way we 
could make a little piece of change 5 

It seemed simple and innocent. Doc laid down four more 
starfish m lines. "I could use three or four hundred frogs, 5 
he said Td get them myself, but I’ve got to go down to La 
Jolla to-night. There’s a good tide to-morrow and I have 
to get some octopi 5 

"Same price for frogs? 5 Mack asked "Five cents apiece. 5 

"Same price, 5 said Doc. 

Mack was jovial. "Don’t you worry about frogs, Doc, 5 he 
said. "We’ll get you all the frogs you want. You just rest easy 
about frogs. Why we can get them right up Carmel River. 
I know a place 5 <• 

"Good, 5 said Doc. "I’ll take all you get, but I need about 
three hundred. 5 

"Just you rest easy. Doc. Don’t you lose no sleep about 
it. You’ll get your frogs, maybe seven eight hundred. 5 He 
put the Doc at his ease about frogs and then a little cloud 
crossed Mack’s face "Doc, 5 he said, "any chance of using 
your car to go up the Valley? 5 

"No, 5 said Doc. "I told you. I have to drive to La Jolla to- 
night to make io-mor row’s tide. 5 



Cannery Row 139 

*Oh/ said Mac dispiritedly. ‘Oh. Well, don’t you worry 
about it, Doc Maybe we can get Lee Chong’s old truck.® 
And then his face fell a little further. ‘Doc/ he said, ‘on a 
business deal like this, would you advance two or three bucks 
for petroP I know Lee Chong won’t give us petrol 3 

‘No/ said Doc He had fallen into this before. Once he 
had financed Gay to go for turtles. He financed him for two 
weeks and at the end of that time Gay was in jail on his 
wife’s charge and he never did go for turtles. 

‘Well, maybe we can’t go then/ said Mack sadly. 

Now Doc really needed the frogs. He tried to work out 
some method which was business and not philanthropy. ‘I’ll 
tell you what I’ll do/ he said ‘I’ll give you a note to my petrol 
station so you can get ten gallons of petrol How will that be?’ 

Mack smiled. ‘Fine/ he said. ‘That will work out just fine. 
I and the boys will get an early start to-morrow. Time you 
get back from the south, we’ll have more damn frogs than 
you ever seen m your life 3 

Doc went to the labelling desk and wrote a note to Red 
Williams at the petrol station, authorizing the issue of ten 
gallons of petrol to Mack. ‘Here you are/ he said. 

Mack was smiling broadly ‘Doc/ he said, ‘you can get to 
sleep to-night and not even give frogs a thought. We’ll have 
piss-pots full of them by the time you get back 3 

Doc watched him go a little uneasily. Doc’s dealings with 
Mack # and the boys had always been interesting, but rarely 
had they been profitable to Doc. He remembered ruefully 
the time Mack sold him fifteen tom-cats and by night the 
owners came and got every one. ‘Mack/ he had asked, ‘why 
all tom-cats?’ 

Mack said: ‘Doc, it’s my own invention, but I’ll tell you 
because you’re a good friend. You make a big wire trap and 
then you don’t use bait. You use — well — you use a lady cat. 
Catch every God-damn tom-cat in the country that way.’ 

From the laboratory Mack crossed the street and went 



140 Cannery Row 

through the swinging screen doors into Lee Chong’s grocery. 
Mrs Lee was cutting bacon on the big butcher’s block. A 
Lee cousin primped up slightly wilted heads of lettuce the 
way a girl primps a loose finger wave. A cat lay asleep on a 
big pile of oranges Lee Chong stood in his usual place be- 
hind the cigar counter and in front of the liquor shelves. His 
tapping finger on the change mat speeded up a little when 
Mack came m. 

Mack wasted no time in sparring ‘Lee/ he said, c Doc 
over there’s got a problem He’s got a big order for frogs 
trom the New York Museum. Means a lot to Doc Besides 
the dough there’s a lot of credit getting an order like that 
Doc’s got to go south and I and the boys said we’d help him 
out. I think a guy’s friends ought to help him out of a hole 
when they can, especially a nice guy like Doc. Why, I bet 
he spends sixty seventy dollars a month with you.’ 

Lee Chong remained silent and watchful. His fat finger 
barely moved on the change mat, but it flicked slightly like 
a tense cat’s tail 

Mack plunged into his thesis. ‘Will you let us take your 
old truck to go up Carmel Valley for frogs for Doc - for good 
old Doc?’ 

Lee Chong smiled in triumph. ‘Tluck no good,’ he said 
‘Bloke down/ 

This staggered Mack for a moment, but he recovered. He 
spread the order for petrol on the cigar counter ‘Look*’ he 
said. ‘Doc needs them frogs. He give me this order for petrol 
to get them. I can’t let Doc down. Now Gay is a good me- 
chanic. If he fixes your truck and puts it in good shape, will 
you let us take it?’ 

Lee put back his head so that he could see Mack through his 
half-glasses. There didn’t seem to be anything wrong with 
the proposition. The truck really wouldn’t run. Gay really 
was a good mechanic and the order for petrol was definite 
evidence of good faith. 



Cannery Row 141 

‘How long you be gone?* Lee asked 

‘Maybe half a day, maybe a w hole day Just 5 til we get the 
frogs ’ 

Lee was worried, but he couldn’t see any way out* The 
dangers were all there and Lee knew all of them. ‘Okay/ 
said Lee. 

‘Good/ said Mack ‘I knew Doc could depend on you. 
I’ll get Gay right to work on that truck.’ He turned about 
to leave. ‘By the way/ he said ‘Doc’s paying us five cents 
apiece for those frogs W e 5 re going to get seven or eight hun- 
dred. How about taking a pint of Old Tennis Shoes just ’til 
we can get back with the frogs?’ 

‘No*’ said Lee Chong. 


CHAPTER X 

Frankie began coining to Western Biological when he was 
eleven years old For a week or so he just stood outside the 
basement door and looked m Then one day he stood inside 
the door. Ten days later he was in the basement. He had 
very large eyes and his hair was a dark, wiry, dirty shock. 
His hands were filthy. He picked up a piece of excelsior and 
put it in a garbage can and then he looked at Doc where he* 
worked labelling specimen bottles containing purple Velella. 
Finally Frankie got to the work-bench and he put his dirty 
fingers on the bench. It took Frankie three weeks to get that 
far, and he was ready to bolt every instant of the time. 

Finally one day Doc spoke to him. ‘What’s your name, 
son?’ 

‘Frankie.’ 

‘Where do you live?’ 

‘Up there/ a gesture up the hill. 

‘Why aren’t you in school?’ 

‘I don’t go to school.’ 



Cannery Row 


142 

‘Why not ? 5 

‘They don’t want me there . 3 

‘Your hands are dirty. Don’t you ever wash?’ 

Frankie looked stricken and then he went to the sink and 
scrubbed his hands, and always afterwards he scrubbed his 
hands almost raw every day. 

And he came to the laboratory every day It was an as- 
sociation without much talk Doc by a telephone call estab- 
lished that what Frankie said was true. They didn’t want 
him in school. He couldn’t learn and there was something a 
little wrong with his co-ordination. There was no place for 
him. He wasn’t an idiot, he wasn’t dangerous, his parents, 
or parent, would not pay for his keep on an institution. 
Frankie didn’t often sleep at the laboratory, but he spent his 
days there And sometimes he crawled m the excelsior crate 
and slept That was probably when there was a crisis at home. 

Doc asked. ‘Why do you come here?’ 

'‘You don’t hit me or give me a nickel , 5 said Frankie. 

a Do they hit you at home?’ 

‘There’s uncles around all the time at home. Some of 
them hit me and tell me to get out and some of them give 
me a nickel and tell me to get out ’ 

‘Where’s your father?’ 

‘Dead,* said Frankie vaguely. 

‘Where’s your mother?’ 

‘With the uncles.’ 

Doc clipped Frankie’s hair and got rid of the lice. At Lee 
Chong’s he got him a new pair of overalls and a striped 
sweater and Frankie became his slave 

‘I love you,’ he said one afternoon. ‘Oh, I love you.’ 

He wanted to work in the laboratory He swept out every 
day, but there was something a little wrong He couldn’t get 
a floor quite clean. He tried to help with grading crayfish 
for size. There they were in a bucket, all sizes. They were 
to be grouped in the big pans - laid out - all the three-inch 



Cannery Row 143 

ones together and all the four-inch ones, and so forth. 
Franlde tried and the perspiration stood on his forehead, but 
he couldn’t do it Size relationships just didn’t get through 
to him 

c No, 5 Doc would say "Look, Franlde. Put them beside 
your finger like this so you’ll know which ones are this long. 
See? This one goes from the tip of your finger to the base of 
your thumb Now you just pick out another one that goes 
from the tip of your finger down to the same place and it 
will be right/ Frankie tried and he couldn’t do it. When 
Doc went upstairs Frankie crawled m the excelsior box and 
didn’t come out all afternoon 

But Frankie was a nice, good, kind boy. He learned to 
light Doc’s cigars and he wanted Doc to smoke all the time 
so he could light the cigars 

Better than anything else Frankie loved it when there were 
parties upstairs in the laboratory When girls and men 
gathered to sit and talk, when the great phonograph played 
music that throbbed m his stomach and made beautiful and 
huge pictures form vaguely in his head, Frankie loved it* 
Then he crouched down m a corner behind a chair where 
he was hidden and could watch and listen. When there was 
laughter at a joke he didn’t understand Frankie laughed de- 
lightedly behind his chair, and when the conversation dealt 
with abstractions his brow furrowed and he became intent 
and serious. 

One afternoon he did a desperate thing. There was a small 
party in the laboratory Doc was in the kitchen pouring 
beer when Frankie appeared beside him. Frankie grabbed a 
glass of beer and rushed it through the door and gave it to 
a girl sitting in a big chair. 

She took the glass and said* 6 Why, thank you,’ and she 
smiled at him. 

And Doc coming through the door said: Wes, Frankie is 
a great help to me/ 



144 Cannery Row 

Frankie couldn’t forget that He did the thing m his mind 
over and over, just how he had taken the glass and just how 
the girl sat and then her voice - ‘Why, thank you/ and Doc 
— a great help to me — Frankie is a great help to me - sure 
Frankie is a great help — Frankie/ and Oh, my God! 

He knew a big party was coming because Doc bought 
steaks and a great deal of beer and Doc let him help clean 
out all the upstairs. But that was nothing, for a great plan 
had formed m Frankie’s mind and he could see just how it 
would be. He went over it again and again It was beautiful 
It was perfect. 

Then the party started and people came and sat in the 
front room, girls and young women and men. 

Frankie had to wait until he had the kitchen to himself 
and the door closed And it was some time before he had it 
so. But at last he was alone and the door was shut. He could 
near the chatter of conversation and the music from the 
great phonograph. He worked very quietly - first the tray — 
then get out the glasses without breaking any Now fill them 
with beer and let the foam settle a little and then fill 
again. 

Now he was ready He took a great breath and opened 
the door. The music and the talk roared around him. 
Frankie picked up the tray of beer and walked through the 
door. He knew how. He went straight toward the same 
young woman who had thanked him before And then r right 
in front of her, the thing happened, and co-ordination failed, 
the hands fumbled, the muscles pamcked, the nerves tele- 
graphed to a dead operator, the responses did not comeback. 
Tray and beer collapsed forward into the young woman’s 
lap For a moment Frankie stood still And then he turned 
and ran. 

The room was quiet. They could hear him run downstairs 
and go into the cellar. They heard a hollow scrabbling 
sound - and then silence. 



Cannery Rou 145 

Doc walked quiet!} down the stairs and into the cellar 
Frankie was m the excelsior box burrowed down dear to 
the bottom, with the pile of excelsior on top of him. Doc 
could hear him w tampering there. Doc w ailed for a moment 
and then he w ent quietly back upstairs 

There wasn’t a thing m the world he could do. 


CHAPTER XI 

The Model T Ford truck of Lee Chong had a dignified his- 
tory In 1923 it had been a passenger car belonging to Dr 
W T Waters. He used it for five years and sold it to an in- 
surance man named Rattle Mr Rattle was not a careful 
man The car he got in clean nice condition he drove like 
fury. Mr Rattle drank on Saturday nights and the car suf- 
fered The fenders w^ere broken and bent He w T as a pedal 
rider too and the bands had to be changed often When Mr 
Rattle embezzled a client’s money and ran away to San 
Jose, he was caught with a high-hair blonde and sent up 
within ten days. 

The body of the car was so battered that its next owner 
cut it in two and added a little truck bed. 

The next owner took off the front of the cab and the wind- 
shield. He used it to haul squids and he liked a fresh breeze 
to blqw m his face. His name was Francis Almones, and he 
had a sad life, for he always made just a fraction less than he 
needed to live His father had left him a little money, but 
year by year and month by month, no matter how hard 
Francis worked or how careful he was, his money grew less 
until he just dried up and blew away. 

Lee Chong got the truck m payment of a grocery bill. 

By this time the truck was little more than four wheels 
and an engine, and the engine was so crotchety and sullen 
and senile that it required expert care and consideration. 



1 48 Cannery Row 

Lee Chong did not give it these things, with the result that 
the truck stood in the tall grass back of the grocery most of 
the time with the mallows growing between its spokes. It 
had solid tyres on its back wheels and blocks held its front 
wheels off the ground 

Probably any one of the boys from the Palace Flophouse 
could have made the truck run, for they were all competent 
practical mechanics, but Gay was an inspired mechanic. 
There is no term comparable to green thumbs to apply to 
such a mechanic, but there should be. For there are men 
who can look, listen, tap, make an adjustment, and a ma- 
chine works Indeed there are men near whom a car runs 
better. And such a one was Gay. His fingers on a timer or a 
carburettor adjustment screw were gentle and wise and sure. 
He could fix the delicate electric motors in the laboratory 
He could have worked in the canneries all the tim e had he 
wished, for m that industry, which complains bitterly when 
it does not make back its total investment every year in pro- 
fits, the machinery is much less important than the fiscal 
statement. Indeed, if you could can sardines with ledgers, 
the owners would have been very happy. js^ s was t k e y used 
decrepit, struggling old horrors of machines that needed the 
constant attention of a man like Gay. 

Mack got the boys up early. They had their coffee and 
immediately moved over to the truck where it lay among 
the weeds. Gay was in charge He kicked the blocked-up 
front wheels. ‘Go borrow a pump and get those pumped up,’ 
he said. Then he put a stick in the petrol-tank under the 
board which served as a seat. By gome miracle there was a 
half-inch of petrol in the tank. Now Gay went over the most 
probable difficulties. He took out the coil boxes, scraped the 
points, adjusted the gap, and put them back He opened the 
carburettor to see that petrol came through. He pushed on 
the crank to see that the whole shaft wasn’t frozen and the 
pistons rusted in their cylinders. 



Cannery Mow 147 

Meanwhile the pump arrived and Eddie and Jones spelled 
each other on the tyres. 

Gay hummed* ‘Dum tiddy — dum tiddv/ as he worked. 
He removed the spark-plugs and scraped the points and 
bored the carbon out Then Gay drained a little petrol into 
a can and poured some into each cylinder before he put the 
spark-plugs back He straightened up ‘We’re going to need 
a couple of dry cells/ he said ‘See if Lee Chong will let us 
have a couple * 

Mack departed and returned almost immediately with a 
universal No which was designed by Lee Chong to cover all 
future requests 

Gay thought deeply, T know where’s a couple — pretty 
good ones too, but I won’t go get them ’ 

‘Where ? 5 asked Mack 

‘Down cellar at my house/ said Gay. ‘They run the front- 
door-bell If one of you fellas wants to kind of edge into my 
cellar without my wnfe seeing you, they’re on top of the 
side stringer on the left-hand side as you go m But for God’s 
sake, don’t let my wife catch you 5 

A conference elected Eddie to go and he departed. 

‘If you get caught don’t mention me/ Gay called out after 
him. Meanwhile Gay tested the bands. The low-high pedal 
didn’t quite touch the floor, so he knew there was a little 
band left. The brake pedal did touch the floor, so there was 
no brake, but the reverse pedal had lots of band left. On a 
Model T Ford the reverse is your margin of safety When 
your brake is gone, you can use reverse as a brake. And when 
the low gear band is worn too thin to pull up a steep HU, 
why, you can turn round and back up it. Gay found there 
was plenty of reverse and he knew everything was all right. 

It was a good omen that Eddie came back with the dry 
cells without trouble. Mrs Gay had been m the kitchen. 
Eddie could hear her walking about, but she didn’t hear 
Eddie. He was very good at such things. 



148 Cannery Row 

Gay connected the dry cells and he advanced the petrol 
and retarded the spark-lever "Twist her tail,’ he said. 

He was such a wonder, Ga\ was - the little mechanic of 
God, the St Francis of all things that turn and twist and 
explode, the St Francis of coils and armatures and gears. 
And if at some time all the heaps of cars, cut-down Dusen- 
bergs. Bracks, De Sotos and Plymouths, American Austins 
and Isotta-Fraschims praise God m a great chorus — it will 
be largely due to Gay and his brotherhood. 

One twist - one little twist and the engine caught and 
laboured and faltered and caught again Gay advanced the 
spark and reduced the petrol He switched over to the mag- 
neto and the Ford of Lee Chong chuckled and jiggled and 
clattered happily as though it knew it was working for a man 
who loved and understood it 

There were two small technical legal difficulties with the 
truck - it had no recent licence plates and it had no lights. 
But the boys hung a rag permanently and accidentally on 
the rear plate to conceal its vintage and they dabbed the 
front plate with good thick mud. The equipment of the ex- 
pedition was slight, some long-handled frog-nets and some 
gunny-sacks. City hunters going out for sport load them- 
selves with food and liquor, but not Mack. He presumed 
rightly that the country was where food came from. Two 
loaves of bread and what was left of Eddie’s wimng jug was 
all the supply. The party clambered on the truck. Gay drove 
and Mack sat beside him; they bumped round the corner of 
Lee Chong’s and down through the lot, threading among 
the pipes Mr Malloy waved at them from his seat by the 
boiler. Gay eased across the pavement and down off the 
kerb gently because the front tyres showed fabric all the way 
around. With all their alacrity, it was afternoon when they 
got started. 

The truck eased into Red Williams’ service station. Mack 
got out and gave his paper to Red. He said* 5 Doc was a little 



Cannery Row 149 

short of change So if you’ll put five gallons in and just give 
us a buck instead of the other five gallons, why, that’s what 
Doc wants He had to go south, you know. Had a big deal 
down there ’ 

Red smiled good-naturedly. *You know. Mack/ he said, 
"Doc got to figuring if there was some kind of loop-hole, and 
he put his finger on the same one you did. Doc’s a pretty 
bright fellow So he phoned me last night.’ 

"Put m the whole ten gallons/ said Mack. "No — wait. It’ll 
slop around and spill. Put m five and give us five in a can - 
one of them sealed cans.’ 

Red smiled happily. "Doc kind of figured that one too/ he 
said. 

"Put m ten gallons/ said Mack. "And don’t go leaving 
none in the hose.’ 

The little expedition did not go through the centre of 
Monterey. A delicacy about the licence plates and the lights 
made Gay choose back streets. There would be the time 
when they would go up Carmel Hill and down into the Val- 
ley, a good four miles on a main highway, exposed to any 
passing cop until they turned up the fairly unfrequented 
Carmel Valley road Gay chose a back street that brought 
them out on the main highway at Peter’s Gate just before 
the steep Carmel Hill starts. Gay took a good noisy clatter- 
ing run at the hill and m fifty yards he put the pedal down 
to low. He knew it wouldn’t work, the band was worn too 
thin. On the level it was all right, but not on a hill. He 
stopped, let the truck back round and aimed it down the hill. 
Then he gave it the petrol and the reverse pedal. And the 
reverse was not worn The truck crawled steadily and slowly 
but backward up Carmel Hill. 

And they very nearly made it. The radiator boiled, of 
course, but most Model T experts believed that it wasn’t 
working well if it wasn’t boiling. 

Someone should write an erudite essay on the moral. 



1 50 Cannery Row 

physical* and aesthetic effect of the Model T Ford on the 
American nation. Two generations of Americans knew more 
about the Ford coil than the clitoris* about the planetary 
system of gears than the solar system of stars. With the Model 
T, part of the concept of private property disappeared Pliers 
ceased to be privately owned and a tyre-pump belonged to 
the last man who had picked It up. Most of the babies of the 
period -were conceived m Model T Fords and not a few were 
bom in them. The theory of the Anglo-Saxon home became 
so warped that it never quite recovered 

The truck backed sturdily up Carmel Hill and it got past 
the Jack’s Peak road and was just going into the last and 
steepest pull when the motor’s breathing thickened, gulped, 
and strangled It seemed very 7 quiet when the motor was 
still. Gay, who was heading down-hill, anyway, ran down 
the hill fifty feet and turned into the Jack’s Peak road 
entrance. 

‘What is it?’ Mack asked 

‘Carburettor, I think,’ said Gay The engine sizzled and 
creaked with heat and the jet of steam that blew down the 
overflow-pipe sounded like the hiss of an alligator 

The carburettor of a Model T is not complicated, but it 
needs all of its parts to function. There is a needle valve, and 
the point must be on the needle and must sit in its hole or 
the carburettor does not work. 

Gay held the needle in his hand and the point was broken 
off. ‘How m hell you s’pose that happened?’ he asked 
‘Magic , 3 said Mack, ‘just pure magic. Gan you fix it?’ 
‘Hell, no,’ said Gay. ‘Got to get another one ’ 

‘How much they cost?’ 

‘About a buck if you buy one new — quarter at a wrecker’s. ’ 
‘You got a buck?’ Mack asked. 

‘Yeah, but I won’t need it.’ 

‘Well, get back as soon as you can, will you? We’ll just 
stay right here.’ 



Cannery Row 151 

c Any ways, you won’t go running off without a needle 
valve/ said Gay. He stepped out to the road. He thumbed 
three cars before one stopped for him. The boys watched 
him climb m and start down the hill. They didn’t see him 
again for one hundred and eighty da\s. 

Oh, the infinity of possibility"! How could it happen that 
the car that picked up Gay broke down before it got into 
Monterey? If Gay had not been a mechanic, he would not 
have fixed the car. If he had not fixed it the owner wouldn’t 
have taken him to Jimmy Brucia’s for a drink. And why was 
it Jimmy’s birthday? Out of all the possibilities m the world 
- the millions of them - only events occurred that lead to 
the Salmas jail. Sparky Enea and Tiny Colletti had made 
up a quarrel and were helping Jimmy to celebrate his birth- 
day. The blonde came m The musical argument in front 
of the juke-box. Gay’s new friend who knew a judo hold and 
tried to show it to Sparky and got his wrist broken when the 
hold w ent wrong The policeman with a bad stomach - all 
unrelated, irrelevant details and yet all running m one direc- 
tion. Fate just didn’t intend Gay to go on that frog-hunt, 
and Fate took a hell of a lot of trouble and people and acci- 
dents to keep him from it. When the final climax came with 
the front of Holman’s bootery broken out and the party 
trying on the shoes m the display window only Gay didn’t 
hear the fire whistle. Only Gay didn’t go to the fire, and 
when the police came they found him sitting all alone in Hol- 
man’s window wearing one brown Oxford and one patent 
leather dress shoe with a grey cloth top. 

Back at the truck the boys built a little fire when it got 
dark and the chill crept up from the ocean. The pines above 
them soughed m the fresh sea wind. The boys lay in the 
pme-needles and looked at the lonely sky through the pine 
branches. For a while they spoke of the difficulties Gay must 
be having getting a needle valve, and then gradually as the 
time passed they didn’t mention him any more. 



1 52 Cannery Row 

"Somebody should of gone with him,’ said Mack 
About ten o’clock Eddie got up. "There’s a construction 
camp a piece up the hill/ he said T think I’ll go up and see 
if they got any Model T’s ’ 


CHAPTER XII 

Monterey is a city with a long and brilliant literary tradi- 
tion. It remembers with pleasure and some glory that Robert 
Louis Stevenson lived there Treasure Island certainly has 
the topography and the coastal plan of Pt Lobos More re- 
cently in Carmel there have been a great number of literary 
men about, but there is not the old flavour, the old dignity 
of the true belles-lettres . Once the town was greatly outraged 
over what the citizens considered a slight to an author 
It had to do with the death of Josh Billings, the great 
humorist. 

Where the new post office is, there used to be a deep gulch 
with w’ater flowing in it and a little foot-bridge over it. On 
one side of the gulch was a fine old adobe and on the other 
the house of the doctor who handled all the sickness, birth, 
and death in the town* He worked with ammals too and, 
having studied in France, he even dabbled m the new prac- 
tice of embalming bodies before they were buried. Some of 
the old-timers considered this sentimental and some thought 
it wasteful, and to some it was sacrilegious since there was no 
provision for it in any sacred volume. But the better and 
richer families were coming to it, and it looked to become 
a fad. 

One morning elderly Mr Carriaga was walking from his 
house on the hill down toward Alvarado Street. He was just 
crossing the foot-bridge when his attention was drawn to a 
small boy and a dog struggling up out of the gulch. The boy 
earned a liver while the dog dragged yards of intestine at the 



Cannery Row 153 

end of which a stomach dangled, Mr Carriaga paused and 
addressed the little boy politely . "Good morning/ 

In those days little boys were courteous ‘Good morning, 
sir/ 

£ Where are y T ou going with the liver?’ 

‘I’m going to make some chum and catch some mackerel/ 
Mr Carriaga smiled. ‘And the dog, will he catch mackerel 
too 3 ’ 

‘The dog found that It’s his, sir. We found them in the 
gulch/ 

Mr Carriaga smiled and strolled on and then his mind 
began to work That isn’t a beef liver, it’s too small And it 
isn’t a calf’s liver, it’s too red. It isn’t a sheep’s liver .. Now 
his mind was alert. At the comer he met 2vXr Ryan, 

‘Anyone die in Monterey last night 35 he asked 
‘Not that I know of/ said Mr Ryan 
‘Anyone killed* 5 ’ 

‘No ’ 

They walked on together and Mr Carriaga told about the 
little boy and the dog 

At the ‘Adobe Bar’ a number of citizens were gathered for 
their morning conversation. There Mr Carriaga told his 
story again, and he had just finished when the constable 
came into the ‘Adobe’. He should know if anyone had died. 
‘No one died in Monterey,’ he said. ‘But Josh Billings died 
out at the Hotel del Monte/ 

The men m the bar were silent. And the same thought 
went through all their minds. Josh Billings was a great man, 
a great writer. He had honoured Monterey by dying there 
and he had been degraded. Without much discussion a com- 
mittee formed made up of everyone there. The stem men 
walked quickly to the gulch and across the foot-bridge and 
they hammered on the door of the doctor who had studied 
in France, 

He had worked late. The knocking got him out of bed and 



154 Cannery Row 

brought him tousled of hair and beard to the door m his 
nightgown* Mr Carnaga addressed him sternly ‘Did you 
embalm Josh Billings? 5 

‘Why - yes 5 

‘What did }ou do with his “xnards 53 ? 3 

‘Why — I threw them m the gulch where I always do. 5 

They made him dress quickly then and they hurried down 
to the beach If the little boy had gone quickly about his 
business, it would have been too late. He was just getting 
into a boat when the committee arrived The intestine was 
in the sand where the dog had abandoned it. 

Then the French doctor was made to collect the parts. He 
was forced to wash them reverently and pick out as much 
sand as possible. The doctor himself had to stand the ex- 
pense of the leaden box which went into the coffin of Josh 
Billings. For Monterey was not a town to let dishonour come 
to a literary man 


CHAPTER XIII 

Mack and the boys slept peacefully on the pme-needles. 
Some time before dawn Eddie came back. He had gone a 
long way before he found a Model T. And then when he did, 
he wondered whether or not it would be a good idea to take 
the needle out of its seat. It might not fit. So he took the 
whole carburettor. The boys didn’t wake up when he got 
back. He lay down beside them and slept under the pine- 
trees. There was one nice thing about Model T’s. The parts 
were not only interchangeable, they were unidentifiable. 

There is a beautiful view from the Carmel grade, the 
curving bay with the waves creaming on the sand, the dune 
country around Seaside and right at the bottom of the hill, 
the warm intimacy of the town. 

Mack got up m the dawn and hustled his pants where 



Cannery Row 155 

they bound ham and he stood looking down on the bay. He 
could see some of the purse-seiners coming in. A tanker 
stood over against Seaside, taking on oil. Behind Mm the 
rabbits stirred m the bush. Then the sun came up and shook 
the night chill out of the air the way you’d shake a rug 
When he felt the first sun warmth. Mack shivered. 

The boys ate a little bread while Eddie installed the new 
carburettor And when it was ready, they didn’t bother to 
crank it. They pushed it out to the highway and coasted in 
gear until it started And then, Eddie driving, they backed 
up over the rise, over the top and turned and headed forward 
and down past Hatton Fields. In Carmel Valley the arti- 
choke plants stood grey-green, and the willows were lush 
along the river. They turned left up the valley. Luck blos- 
somed from the first. A dusty Rhode Island red rooster who 
had wandered too far from his own farmyard crossed the 
road and Eddie Mt him without running too far off the road. 
Sitting m the back of the truck. Hazel picked Mm as they 
went and let the feathers fly from his hand, the most widely 
distributed evidence on record, for there was a little breeze 
m the morning blowing down from Jamesburg and some of 
the red cMcken feathers were deposited on Pt Lobos and 
some even blew out to sea. 

The Carmel is a lovely little river. It isn’t very long, but 
in its course it has everytMng a river should have. It rises 
in th« mountains, and tumbles down a while, runs through 
shallows, is dammed to make a lake, spills over the dam, 
crackles among round boulders, wanders lazily under syca- 
mores, spills into pools where trout live, drops in against 
banks where crayfish live. In the winter it becomes a torrent, 
a mean little fierce river, and m the summer it is a place for 
children to wade m and for fishermen to wander in* Frogs 
blink from its banks and the deep ferns grow beside it. Deer 
and foxes come to drink from it, secretly in the morning and 
evening, and now and then a mountain lion crouched flat 



1 56 Cannery Row 

laps its water The farms of the rich little valley back up to 
the ri\er and take its water for the orchards and the vege- 
tables. The quail call beside it and the wild doves come 
whistling in at dusk Raccoons pace its edges looking for 
frogs It’s everything a river should be 

A few miles up the valley the river cuts in under a high 
cliff from which vines and ferns hang down At the base of 
this cliff there is a pool, green and deep, and on the other 
side of the pool there is a little sandy place where it is good 
to sit and to cook your dinner 

Mack and the boys came down to this place happily. It 
was perfect. If frogs were available, they would be here. It 
was a place to relax, a place to be happy. On the way out 
they had thriven. In addition to the big red chicken there 
was a sack of carrots which had fallen from a vegetable 
truck, half a dozen omons which had not. Mack had a bag 
of coffee in his pocket In the truck there was a five-gallon 
can with the top cut off The wming-jug was nearly half full. 
Such things as salt and pepper had been brought. Mack and 
the boys would have thought anyone who travelled without 
salt, pepper and coffee very silly indeed. 

Without effort, confusion, or much thought, four round 
stones were rolled together on the little beach The rooster 
who had challenged the sunrise of this very day lay dis- 
membered and clean in water in the five-gallon can with 
peeled onions about him, while a little fire of dead willow 
sticks sputtered between the stones, a very little fire. Only 
fools build big fires. It would take a long time to cook this 
rooster, for it had taken him a long time to achieve his size 
and muscularity. But as the water began to boil gently about 
him, he smelled good from the beginning 

Mack gave them a pep talk. ‘The best time for frogs is at 
night/ he said, ‘so I guess we’ll just lay around ’til it gets 
dark.’ They sat m the shade and gradually one by one they 
stretched out and slept. 



Cannery Row 157 

Mack was right. Frogs do not move around much in the 
day-time; they hide under ferns and they look secretly out 
of holes under rocks. The way to catch frogs is with a flash- 
light at night The men slept knowing they might have a 
very active night Only Hazel stayed awake to replenish the 
little fire under the cooking chicken. 

There is no golden afternoon next to the cliff When the 
sun went over it at about two o’clock a whispering shade 
came to the beach The sycamores rustled in the afternoon 
breeze Little water-snakes slipped down to the rocks and 
then gently entered the water and swam along through the 
pool, their heads held up like little periscopes and a tiny 
wake spreading behind them. A big trout jumped in the 
pool. The gnats and mosquitoes which avoid the sun came 
out and buzzed over the water. All of the sun bugs, the flies, 
the dragonflies, the w asps, the hornets, went home. And as 
the shadow came to the beach, as the first quail began to call. 
Mack and the boys awakened The smell of the chicken stew 
was heart-breaking Hazel had picked a fresh bay-leaf from 
a tree by the river and he had dropped it m. The carrots 
were m now. Coffee in its own can was simmering on its own 
rock, far enough from the flame so that it did not boil too 
hard Mack awakened, started up, stretched, staggered to 
the pool, washed his face with cupped hands, hacked, spat, 
washed out his mouth, broke wind, tightened his belt, 
scratched his legs, combed his wet hair with his fingers, 
drank from the jug, belched and sat down by the fire ‘By 
God that smells good,’ he said. 

Men all do about the same things when they wake up. 
Mack’s process was loosely the one all of them followed. And 
soon they had all come to the fire and complimented Hazel 
Hazel stuck his pocket-knife into the muscles of the chicken. 

‘He ain’t going to be what you’d call tender,’ said Hazel. 
‘You’d have to cook him about two weeks to get him tender. 
How old about do you judge he was, Mack?’ 



158 Cannery Row 

‘I’m forty-eight and I ain’t as tough as he is/ said 
Mack. 

Eddie said: ‘How old can a chicken get, do you think - 
that’s if nobody pushed him around or he don’t get sick?’ 

‘That’s something nobody isn’t ever going to find out , 5 
said Jones. 

It was a pleasant time. The jug went around and warmed 
them 

Jones said: ‘Eddie, I don’t mean to complain none. I was 
just thinkm’. S’pose you had two or three jugs back of the 
bar. S’pose you put ail the whisky in one and all the wine in 
another and all the beer in another 

A slightly shocked silence followed the suggestion T didn’t 
mean nothing,’ said Jones quickly T like it this way ...’ 
Jones talked too much then because he knew he had made 
a social blunder and he wasn’t able to stop £ What I like 
about it this way is you never know what kind of a drunk 
you’re going to get out of it,’ he said. ‘You take whisky,’ he 
said hurriedly. ‘You more or less know what you’ll do. A 
fightm’ guy fights and a crym’ guy cries, but this’ — he said 
magnanimously - ‘why, you don’t know whether it’ll run 
you up a pine-tree or start you swimming to Santa Cruz. 
It’s more fun that way,’ he said weakly. 

‘Speaking of swimming,’ said Mack to fill m the indelicate 
place in the conversation and to shut Jones up. ‘I wonder 
whatever happened to that guy McKinley Moran Remem- 
ber that deep-sea diver?’ 

T remember him,’ said Hughie. ‘I and him used to hang 
around together. He just didn’t get much work and then 
he got to drinking. It’s kind of tough on you divin 5 and 
drinkin’. Got to worryin’ too. Finally he sold his suit and 
helmet and pump and went on a hell of a drunk and then 
he left town. I don’t know where he went. He wasn’t no 
good after he went down after that Wop that got took down 
with the anchor from the Twelve Brothers . McKinley just 



Cannery Row 159 

dove down Bust his ear-drums, and he wasn’t no good after 
that. Didn’t hurt the Wop a bit ’ 

Mack sampled the jug again. ‘He used to make a lot of 
dough during Prohibition/ Mack said ‘Used to get twenty- 
five bucks a day from the government to dive lookin’ for 
liquor on the bottom and he got three dollars a case from 
Louie for not findin’ it. Had it worked out so he brought up 
one case a day to keep the government happy Lome didn’t 
mind that none Made it so they didn’t get in no new divers. 
McKinley made a lot of dough.’ 

‘Yeah/ said Hughie ‘But he’s like everybody else - gets 
some dough and he wants to get married. He got married 
three times before his dough run out I could always tell. 
He’d buy a white fox piece and bang! - next thing you’d 
know, he’s married ’ 

‘I wonder what happened to Gay/ Eddie asked It was 
the first time they had spoken of him. 

‘Same thing, I guess/ said Mack. ‘You just can’t trust a 
married guy. No matter how much he hates his old lady why 
he’ll go back to her Get to thinkm’ and broodin’ and back 
he’ll go You can’t trust him no more Take Gay/ said Mack. 
‘His old lady hits him. But I bet you when Gay’s away from 
her three days, he gets it figured out that it’s his fault and 
he goes back to make it up to her.’ 

They ate long and daintily, spearing out pieces of chicken, 
holding the dripping pieces until they cooled and then 
gnawing the muscled meat from the bone They speared the 
carrots on pointed willow switches and finally they passed 
the can and drank the juice. And around them the evening 
crept in as delicately as music. The quail called each other 
down to the water. The trout jumped in the pool. And the 
moths came down and fluttered about the pool as the day- 
light mixed into the darkness. They passed the coffee-can 
about and they were warm and fed and silent. At last Mack 
said ‘God damn it. I hate a liar.’ 



i6o Cannery Row 

‘Who’s been Ivin 5 to you 3 * Eddie asked 

‘Oh, I don’t mind a guv that tells a little one to get along 
or to hop up a conversation, but I hate a guy that lies to 
himself ’ 

‘Who done that 05 Eddie asked 

‘Me/ said Mack ‘And maybe you guys Here we are/ he 
said earnestly, ‘the whole God damned shabby lot of us. 
We worked it out that we wanted to give Doc a party So we 
come out here and have a hell of a lot of fun. Then we’ll 
go back and get the dough from Doc There’s five of us, so 
we’ll drink five times as much liquor as he will. And I ain’t 
sure we’re doin’ it for Doc, I ain’t sure we ain’t doin’ it for 
ourselves And Doc’s too nice a fella to do that to Doc is 
the nicest fella I ever knew I don’t want to be the kind of a 
guy that would take advantage of him You know one time 
I put the bee on him for a buck I give him a hell of a story. 
Right in the middle I seen he knew God damn well the story 
was so much malarky So right m the middle I says: “Doc, 
that’s a fuggm’ he!” And he put his hand in his pocket and 
brought out a buck “Mack,” he says, “I figure a guy that 
needs it bad enough to make up a lie to get it, really needs 
it,” and he give me the buck. I paid him that buck back the 
next day. I never did spend it Just kept it overnight and 
then give it back to him.’ 

Hazel said” ‘There ain’t nobody likes a party better than 
Doc. We’re givm’ him the party. What the hell is the c beef?’ 

‘I don’t know/ said Mack, ‘I’d like just to give him some- 
thing when I didn’t get most of it back/ 

‘How about a present?’ Hughie suggested. ‘S’pose we just 
bought the whisky and give it to him and let him do what 
he wants/ 

‘Now you’re talkin’/ said Mack ‘That’s just what we’ll 
do. Well just give him the whisky and fade out/ 

‘You know what’ll happen/ said Eddie. ‘Henri and them 
people from Carmel will smell that whisky out and then 



Cannery Row i6r 

instead of only five of us there’ll be tw entv. Doc told me one 
time himself they can smell him fryin* a steak from Cannery 
Row clear down to Point Sur. I don’t see the percentage. 
He’d come out better if we give him the party ourselves ’ 

Mack considered this reasoning ‘Maybe you’re right/ he 
said at last ‘But s’pose we give him something except whisky, 
maybe cuff-links with his initials.’ 

‘Oh, horse shit/ said Hazel ‘Doc don’t want stuff like 
that.’ 

The night was in by now and the stars were white in the 
sky. Hazel fed the fire and it put a little room of light on the 
beach. Over the hill a fox was barking sharply And now 
in the night the smell of sage came dowm from the hills. The 
water chuckled on the stones where it went out of the deep 
pool. 

Mack was mulling over the last piece of reasoning when 
the sound of footsteps on the ground made them turn. A 
man dark and large stalked near and he had a shot-gun over 
his arm and a pointer walked shyly and delicately at his heel 

‘What the hell are you doing here?’ he asked. 

‘Nothing/ said Mack 

‘The land’s posted. No fishing, hunting, fires, camping. 
Now you just pack up and put that fire out and get off this 
land.* 

Mack stood up humbly. ‘I didn’t know. Captain/ he said. 
‘Honest we never seen the sign, Captain. 5 

‘There’s signs all over. You couldn’t have missed them. 9 

‘Look, Captain, we made a mistake and we’re sorry/ said 
Mack He paused and looked closely at the slouching figure. 
‘You are a military man, aren’t you, sir? I can always tell. 
Military man don’t carry his shoulders the same as ordinary 
people I was in the army so long, I can always tell 5 

Imperceptibly the shoulders of the man straightened, 
nothing obvious, but he held himself differently 

‘I don 5 t allow fires on my place/ he said. 



1 62 Cannery Row 

'Well, we’re sorry, 5 said Mack 'We’ll get right out. Cap- 
tain. You see, we’re workm* for some scientists. We’re gom’ 
to get some frogs They’re working’ on cancer and we’re 
helpin’ out getting some frogs. 5 

The man hesitated for a moment. 'What do they do with 
the frogs^’ he asked. 

'Well, sir, 5 said Mack, 'they give cancer to the frogs and 
then they can study and experiment and they got it nearly 
licked if they can just get some frogs But if you don’t want 
us on your land. Captain, we’ll get right out. Never would 
of come in if we knew.’ Suddenly Mack seemed to see the 
pointer for the first time. 'By God that’s a fine-lookin’ bitch/ 
he said enthusiastically. 'She looks like Nola that win the 
field trials in Virginia last year. She a Virginia dog, Cap- 
tain?’ 

The captain hesitated and then he lied. 'Yes/ he said 
shortly. 'She’s lame. Tick got her right on her shoulder.’ 

Mack was instantly solicitous. 'Mind if I look, Captain? 
Come, girL Gome on, girl.’ The pointer looked up at her 
master and then sidled up to Mack. 'Pile on some twigs so 
I can see/ he said to Hazel. 

'It’s up where she can’t lick it/ said the captain, and he 
leaned over Mack’s shoulder to look. 

Mack pressed some pus out of the evil-looking crater on 
the dog’s shoulder. 'I had a dog once had a thing like this 
and it went right in and killed him. She just had p pups 
didn’t she?’ 

'Yes/ said the captain, 'six. I put iodine on that place.’ 

'No,* said Mack, 'that won’t draw. You got any Epsom 
salts up at your place?’ 

'Yes — there’s a big bottle.’ 

'Well, you make a hot poultice of Epsom salts and put it 
on there. She’s weak, you know, from the pups Be a shame 
if she got sick now. You’d lose the pups too.’ The pointer 
looked deep into Mack’s eyes and then she licked his hand. 



Cannery Row 163 

‘Tell you what I’ll do, Captain, I’ll look after her myself. 
Epsom salt’ll do the trick. That’s the best thing * 

The captain stroked the dog’s head. ‘You know, Fve got 
a pond up by the house that’s so full of frogs I can’t sleep 
nights Why don’t you look up there? They bellow all night. 
I’d be glad to get nd of them, 3 

‘That’s mighty nice of you, 5 said Mack. T*II bet those docs 
would thank you for that But I’d like to get a poultice on 
this dog. 9 He turned to the others. ‘You put out this fire/ 
he said. ‘Make sure there ain’t a spark left and clean up 
around. You don’t want to leave no mess. I and the captain 
will go and take care of Nola here. You fellows follow along 
when you get cleared up. 9 Mack and the captain walked 
away together 

Hazel kicked sand on the fire. T bet Mack could of been 
president of the U S. if he wanted/ he said 

‘What could he do with it if he had it? 9 Jones asked. 
‘There wouldn’t be no fun in that, 9 


CHAPTER XIV 

Early morning is a time of magic in Cannery Row. In the 
grey time after the light has come and before the sun has 
risen, the Row seems to hang suspended out of time in a 
silvery light. The street lights go out, and the weeds are a 
brilliant green. The corrugated iron of the canneries glows 
with the pearly lucence of platinum or old pewter. No auto- 
mobiles are running then. The street is silent of progress and 
business. And the rush and drag of the waves can be heard 
as they splash in among the piles of the canneries. It is a 
time of great peace, a deserted time, a little era of rest. 
Cats drip over the fences and slither like syrup over the 
ground to look for fish-heads. Silent early-morning dogs 
parade majestically, picking and choosing judiciously where- 



1 64 Cannery Row 

on to pec. The sea-gulls come flapping in to sit on the can- 
nery roofs to await the day of refuse. They sit on the roof 
peaks shoulder to shoulder. From the rocks near the Hop- 
kins Marine Station comes the barking of sea-lions like the 
baying of hounds. The air is cool and fresh. In the back 
gardens the gophers push up the morning mounds of fresh 
damp earth and they creep out and drag flowers into their 
holes. Very few people are about, just enough to make it 
seem more deserted than it is. One of Dora’s girls comes 
home from a call on a patron too wealthy or too sick to visit 
the Bear Flag. Her make-up is a little sticky and her feet are 
tired. Lee Chong brings the garbage cans out and stands 
them on the kerb. The old Chinaman comes out of the sea 
and flap-flaps across the street and up past the Palace. The 
cannery watchmen look out and blink at the morning light. 
The bouncer at the Bear Flag steps out on the porch in his 
shirt-sleeves and stretches and yawns and scratches his stom- 
ach. The snores of Mr Malloy’s tenants in the pipes have 
a deep tunnelly quality It is the hour of the pearl - the 
interval between day and night when time stops and examines 
itself. 

On such a morning and m such a light two soldiers and 
two girls strolled easily along the street. They had come out 
of *La Ida’ and they were very tired and very happy. The 
girls were hefty, big-breasted and strong and their blonde 
hair was m slight disarray. They wore printed rayon party 
dresses, wrinkled now and clinging to their convexities. And 
each girl wore a soldier’s cap, one far back on her head and 
the other with the visor down almost on her nose. They 
were full-lipped, broad-nosed, hippy girls and they were 
very tired. 

The soldiers’ tunics were unbuttoned and their belts were 
threaded through their epaulettes. The ties were pulled 
down a little so the shirt-collars could be unbuttoned. And 
the soldiers wore the girls’ hats, one a tiny yellow straw 



Cannery Row 165 

boater with a bunch of daisies on the crown, the other a 
white knitted half-hat to which medallions of blue cello- 
phane adhered. They walked holding hands, swinging their 
hands rhythmically The soldier on the outside had a large 
brown paper bag filled with cold canned beer. They strolled 
softly in the pearly light. They had had a hell of a time and 
they felt good They smiled delicately like weary children 
remembering a party. They looked at one another and 
smiled and thev swung their hands. Past the Bear Flag they 
went and said ‘Hiva* to the bouncer who was scratching his 
stomach They listened to the snores from the pipes and 
laughed a little At Lee Chong’s they stopped and looked 
into the messy display window where tools and clothes and 
food crowded for attention. Swinging their hands and scuf- 
fing their feet, they came to the end of Cannery Row and 
turned up to the railroad track. The girls climbed on the 
rails and walked along on them and the soldiers put their 
arms around the plump waists to keep them from falling* 
Then they went past the boat-works and turned down into 
the park-like property of the Hopkins Marine Station. 
There is a tiny curved beach in front of the station, a minia- 
ture beach between little reefs. The gentle morning waves 
licked up the beach and whispered softly. The fine smell of 
seaweed came from the exposed rocks. As the four came to 
the beach a sliver of the sun broke over Tom Work’s land 
across the head of the bay and it gilded the water and made 
the rocks yellow. The girls sat formally down in the sand and 
straightened their skirts over their knees. One of the soldiers 
punched holes in four cans of beer and handed them round. 
And then the men lay down and put their heads in the girls’ 
laps and looked up into their faces. And they smiled at each 
other, a tired and peaceful and wonderful secret. 

From up near the station came the barking of a dog — the 
watchman, a dark and surly man, had seen them and his 
black and surly cocker spaniel had seen them. He shouted 



1 66 Cannery Row 

at them, and when they did not move he came down on the 
beach and his dog barked monotonously. ‘Don’t you know 
you can’t lay around here 0 You got to get off. This is private 
property!’ 

The soldiers did not even seem to hear him. They smiled 
on and the girls were stroking their hair over the temples. 
At last in slow motion one of the soldiers turned his head so 
that his cheek was cradled between the girl’s legs. He 
smiled benevolently at the caretaker. ‘Why don’t you take 
a flying fuggut the moon?’ he said kindly, and he turned 
back to look at the girl. 

The sun lighted her blonde hair and she scratched him 
over one ear. They didn’t even see the caretaker go back 
to Ms house. 


CHAPTER XV 

By the time the boys got up to the farm-house Mack was in 
the kitchen. The pointer bitch lay on her side, and Mack 
held a cloth saturated with Epsom salts against her tick-bite. 
Among her legs the big fat wiener pups nuzzled and bumped 
for milk and the bitch looked patiently up into Mack’s face, 
saying; ‘You see how it is? I try to tell Mm, but he doesn’t 
understand.’ 

The captain held a lamp and looked down on Mack. 

‘I’m glad to know about that,’ he said. 

Mack said: ‘I don’t want to tell you about your business, 
sir, but these pups ought to be weaned. She ain’t got a hell 
of a lot of milk left and them pups are chewin’ her to pieces.’ 

‘I know,’ said the captain. T s’pose I should have drowned 
them all but one. I’ve been so busy trying to keep the place 
going. People don’t take the interest in bird dogs they used 
to. It’s all poodles and boxers and Dobermans.’ 

‘I know,’ said Mack. ‘And there ain’t no dog like a pointer 



Cannery Row 167 

for a man. I don’t know what’s come over people. But you 
wouldn’t of drowned them, would you, sir?’ 

‘Well, 5 said the captain, ‘since my wife went into politics, 
I’m just running crazy. She got elected to the Assembly for 
this district and when the Legislature isn’t in session, she’s 
off making speeches And when she’s home she’s studying 
all the time and writing bills.’ 

‘Must be lousy m - I mean it must be pretty lonely,’ said 
Mack. ‘Now if I had a pup like this’ - he picked up a squirm- 
ing puzz-faced pup - ‘why, I bet I’d have a real bird dog 
in three years. I’d take a bitch every time.’ 

‘Would you like to have one?’ the captain asked. 

Mack looked up. ‘You mean you’d let me have one? Oh! 
Jesus Christ yes.’ 

‘Take your pick,’ said the captain. ‘Nobody seems to un- 
derstand bird dogs any more.’ 

The boys stood in the kitchen and gathered quick impres- 
sions. It was obvious that the wife was away - the opened 
cans, the frying-pan with lace from fried eggs still sticking 
to it, the crumbs on the kitchen table, the open box of shot- 
gun shells on the bread-box all shrieked of the lack of a 
woman, while the white curtains and the papers on the dish 
shelves and the too small towels on the rack told them a 
woman had been there. And they were unconsciously glad 
she wasn’t there. The kind of women who put papers on 
shelves and had little towels like that instinctively distrusted 
and disliked Mack and the boys. Such women knew that 
they were the worst threats to a home, for they offered ease 
and thought and companionship as opposed to neatness, 
order, and properness. They were glad she was away. 

Now the captain seemed to feel that they were doing him 
a favour. He didn’t want them to leave. He said hesitantly: 
‘S’pose you boys would like a little something to warm you 
up before you go out for the frogs?’ 

The others looked at Mack. Mack was frowning as though 



1 68 Cannery Row 

he was thinking it through ‘When we’re out doin’ scientific 
stuff* we make it a kind of a rule not to touch nothin’/ he 
said* and then quickly, as though he might have gone too 
far; ‘But seem* as how you been so nice to us - well* I 
wouldn’t mind a short one myself. I don’t know about the 
boys.’ 

The boys agreed that they wouldn’t mind a short one 
either. The captain got a flashlight and went down in the 
cellar. They could hear him moving lumber and boxes about* 
and he came back upstairs with a five-gallon oak keg in his 
arms. He set it on the table. ‘During Prohibition I got some 
corn whisky and laid it away I just got to thinking I’d like 
to see how it is. It’s pretty old now. I’d almost forgot it. 
You see — my wife he let it go at that because it was ap- 
parent that they understood. The captain knocked out the 
oak plug from the end of the keg and got glasses down from 
the shelf that had scallop-edged paper laid on it. It is a hard 
job to pour a small drink from a five-gallon keg. Each of 
them got half a water-glass of the clear brown liquor. They 
waited ceremoniously for the captain and then they said: 
4 Over the river*’ and tossed it back. They swallowed* tasted 
their tongues* sucked their lips* and there was a far-away 
look in their eyes. 

Mack peered into his empty glass as though some holy 
message was written in the bottom. And then he raised his 
eyes. ‘You can’t say nothin’ about that,’ he said. /They 
don’t put that in bottles.’ He breathed in deeply and sucked 
Ms breath as it came out. ‘I don’t think I ever tasted nothin’ 
as good as that*’ he said. 

The captain looked pleased. His glance wandered back to 
the keg. ‘It is good,’ he said. ‘You think we might have 
another little one?’ 

Mack stared into his glass again. ‘Maybe a short one,’ he 
agreed. ‘Wouldn’t it be easier to pour out some in a pitcher? 
You’re liable to spill it that way.’ 



Cannery Row 169 

Two hours later they recalled what they had come for. 

The frog pool was square - fifty feet wide and seventy feet 
long and four feet deep. Lush soft grass grew about its edge 
and a little ditch brought the water from the river to it and 
from it little ditches went out to the orchards. There were 
frogs there all right, thousands of them. Their voices beat 
the night, they boomed and barked and croaked and rattled* 
They sang to the stars, to the waning moon, to the waving 
grasses. They bellowed love songs and challenges. The men 
crept through the darkness toward the pool. The captain 
carried a nearly-filled pitcher of whisky and every man had 
his own glass. The captain had found them flash-lights that 
worked. Hughie and Jones carried gunny-sacks. As they 
drew quietly near, the frogs heard them coming. The night 
had been roaring with frog song and then suddenly it was 
silent. Mack and the boys and the captain sat down on the 
ground to have one last short one and to map their cam- 
paign. And the plan was bold. 

During the millennia that frogs and men have lived in the 
same world, it is probable that men have hunted frogs. And 
during that time a pattern of hunt and parry has developed* 
The man with net or bow or lance or gun creeps noiselessly, 
as he thinks, toward the frog. The pattern requires that the 
frog sit stall, sit very still and wait. The rules of the game 
require the frog to wait until the final flicker of a second, 
when # the net is descending, when the lance is in the air, 
when the finger squeezes the trigger, then the frog jumps, 
plops into the water, swims to the bottom and waits until 
the man goes away. That is the way it is done, the way it 
has always been done. Frogs have every right to expect it 
will always be done that way. Now and then the net is too 
quick, the lance pierces, the gun flicks and that frog is gone, 
but it is all fair and in the frame-work. Frogs don’t resent 
that. But how could they have anticipated Mack’s new 
method? How could they have foreseen the horror that 



170 Cannery Row 

followed? The sudden flashing of lights, the shouting and 
squealing of men, the rush of feet. Every frog leaped, plopped 
into the pool, and swam frantically to the bottom. Then 
into the pool plunged the line of men, stamping, churning, 
moving in a crazy line up the pool, flinging their feet about. 
Hysterically the frogs, displaced from their placid spots, 
swam ahead of the crazy thrashing feet and the feet came 
on. Frogs are good swimmers, but they haven’t much en- 
durance. Down the pool they went until finally they were 
bunched and crowded against the ends. And the feet and 
wildly-plunging bodies followed them. A few frogs lost 
their heads and floundered among the feet and got through 
and these were saved. But the majority decided to leave this 
pool for ever, to find a new home in a new country where 
this kind of thing didn’t happen. A wave of frantic, frus- 
trated frogs, big ones, little ones, brown ones, green ones, 
men frogs and women frogs, a wave of them broke over the 
bank, crawled, leaped, scrambled. They clambered up the 
grass, they clutched at each other, little ones rode on big 
ones. And then — horror on horror - the flashlights found 
them. Two men gathered them like berries. The line came 
out of the water and closed in on their rear and gathered 
them like potatoes. Tens and fifties of them were flung into 
the gunny-sacks and the sacks filled with tired, frightened, 
and disillusioned frogs, with dripping, whimpering frogs. 
Some got away, of course, and some had been saved jin the 
pool. But never in fro g history had such an execution taken 
place. Frogs by the pound, by the fifty pounds. They weren’t 
counted, but there must have been six or seven hundred. 
Then happily Mack tied up the necks of the sacks. They 
were soaking, dripping wet and the air was cool. They had 
a short one in the grass before they went back to the house, 
so they wouldn’t catch cold. 

It is doubtful whether the captain had ever had so much 
fun. He was indebted to Mack and the boys. Later when 



Cannery Row 1 71 

the curtains caught fire and were put out with the little 
towels, the captain told the boys not to mind it- He felt it 
was an honour to have them burn his house clear down, if 
they wanted to. 'My wife is a wonderful woman/ he said 
in a kind of peroration. 'Most wonderful woman. Ought 
to of been a man. If she was a man I wouldn* of married her.* 
He laughed a long time over that and repeated it three or 
four times and resolved to remember it, so he could tell it 
to a lot of other people. He filled a jug with whisky and gave 
it to Mack. He w r anted to go to live with them in the Palace 
Flophouse. He decided that his wafe w r ould like Mack and the 
boys if she only knew them Finally, he went to sleep on the 
floor with his head among the puppies. Mack and the boys 
poured themselves a short one and regarded him seriously. 

Mack said* ‘He give me that jug of whisky, didn’t he? 
you heard him p ’ 

'Sure he did,’ said Eddie. 'I heard him.’ 

'And he give me a pup p ’ 

'Sure, pick of the litter. We all heard him. Why?’ 

'I never did roll a drunk and I ain’t gonna start now/ 
said Mack. 'We got to get out of here. He’s gonna wake up 
feekn’ lousy and it’s goin’ to be all our fault. I just don’t 
want to be here.’ Mack glanced at the burned curtains, at 
the floor glistening with whisky and puppy dirt, at the bacon 
grease that was coagulating on the stove front. He went to 
the pups, looked them over carefully, felt bone and frame, 
looked in eyes and regarded jaws, and he picked out a 
beautifully-spotted bitch with a liver-coloured nose and a 
fine dark-yellow eye. ‘Come on, darling/ he said. 

They blew out the lamp because of the danger of fire. It 
was just turning dawn as they left the house. 

'I don’t think I ever had such a fine trip/ said Mack. 'But 
I got to thinkin’ about his wife cornin’ back and it gave me 
the shivers.’ The pup whined in his arms and he put it under 
his coat. 'He’s a real nice fella/ said Mack. 'After you get 



1 7 <a Cannery Row 

Mm feeiin* easy, that Is. 3 He strode on toward the place 
where they had parked the Ford, 6 We shouldn’t go forgettin’ 
we’re doin’ all this for Doc/ he said. ‘From the way tMngs 
are pannin’ out, it looks like Doc is a pretty lucky guy. 3 


CHAPTER XVI 

Probably the busiest time the girls of the Bear Flag ever 
had was the March of the big sardine catch. It wasn’t only 
that the fish ran in silvery billions and money ran almost 
as freely. A new regiment moved into the Presidio and a 
new bunch of soldiers always shop around a good deal be- 
fore they settle down. Dora was short-handed just at that 
time too, for Eva Flanagan had gone to East St Louis on a 
vacation, Phyllis Mae had broken her leg getting out of the 
roller coaster in Santa Cruz, and Elsie Doublebottom had 
made a novena and wasn’t much good for anything else 
The men from the sardine fleet, loaded with dough, were 
in and out all afternoon. They sail at dark and fish all night, 
so they must play in the afternoon. In the evemng the sol- 
diers of the new regiment came down and stood around 
playing the musical-box and drinking Coca-Cola and sizing 
up the girls for the time when they would be paid. Dora 
was having trouble with her income-tax, for she was en- 
tangled in that curious enigma which said the business was 
illegal and then taxed her for it. In addition to everything 
else there were the regulars - the steady customers who had 
been coming down for years, the labourers from the gravel- 
pits, the riders from the ranches, the railroad men who came 
in the front door, and the city officials and prominent busi- 
ness men who came m the rear entrance by the tracks and 
who had little chintz sitting-rooms assigned to them. 

All in all it was a terrific month and right in the middle 
of it the influenza epidemic had to break out. It came to 



Cannery Row 1 73 

the whole town. Mrs Talbot and her daughter of the San 
Carlos Hotel had it. Tom Work had it. Benjamin Peabody 
and his wife had it. Exceientisima Maria Antonia Field had 
it. The whole Gross family came down with it. 

The doctors of Monterey - and there were enough of them 
to take care of the ordinary diseases, accidents and neuroses 
- were running crazy. They had more business than they 
could do among clients who, if they didn’t pay their bills, 
at least had the money to pay them Cannery Row, which 
produces a tougher breed than the rest of the town, was late in 
contracting it, but finally it got them too. The schools were 
closed. There wasn’t a house that hadn’t feverish children 
and sick parents. It was not a deadly disease, as it was in 
1917, but with children it had a tendency to go into the mas- 
toids The medical profession was very busy, and besides, 
Cannery Row was not considered a very good financial risk. 

Now Doc of the Western Biological Laboratory had no 
right to practise medicine. It was not his fault that every- 
one in the Row came to him for medical advice. Before he 
knew it he found himself running from shanty to shanty 
taking temperatures, giving physics, borrowing and deliver- 
ing blankets and even taking food from house to house where 
mothers looked at him with inflamed eyes from their beds, 
and thanked him and put the full responsibility for their 
children’s recovery on him. When a case got really out of 
hand he phoned a local doctor and sometimes one came, if 
it seemed to be an emergency. But to the families it was all 
emergency. Doc didn’t get much sleep. He lived on beer and 
canned sardines. In Lee Chong’s where he went to get beer 
he met Dora, who was there to buy a pair of nail clippers. 

‘You look done in,’ Dora said. 

‘I am,’ Doc admitted. ‘I haven’t had any sleep for about 
a week.’ 

‘I know,’ said Dora. T hear it’s bad. Comes at a bad 
time too.’ 



1 74 Cannery Row 

‘Well, we haven’t lost anybody yet/ said Doc* ‘But there 
are some awful sick kids. The Ransel kids have all developed 
mastoiditis/ 

Ts there anything I can do° s Dora asked. 

Doc said: ‘You know there is. People get so scared and 
helpless. Take the Ransels - they’re scared to death and 
they’re scared to be alone If you, or some of the girls, could 
just sit with them/ 

Dora, who was soft as a mouse’s belly, could be as hard as 
carborundum She went back to the Bear Flag and organized 
it for service. It was a bad time for her, but she did it. The 
Greek cook made a ten-gallon cauldron of strong soup and 
kept it full and kept it strong. The girls tried to keep up 
their business, but they went in shifts to sit with the families, 
and they carried pots of soup when they went. Doc was in 
almost constant demand. Dora consulted him and detailed 
the girls where he suggested. And all the time the business 
at the Bear Flag was booming. The musical-box never 
stopped playing. The men of the fishing fleet and the sol- 
diers stood in line. And the girls did their work and then 
they took their pots of soup and went to sit with the Ransels, 
with the McCarthys, with the Fernas The girls slipped out 
the back door, and sometimes staying with the sleeping 
children the girls dropped to sleep in their chairs. They 
didn’t use make-up for work any more. They didn’t have to. 
Dora herself said she could have used the total membership 
of the old ladies’ home It was the busiest time the girls at the 
Bear Flag could remember. Everyone was glad when it was 
over. 


CHAPTER XVII 

In spite of his friendliness and his friends Doc was a lonely 
and a set-apart man. Mack probably noticed it more than 
anybody. In a group. Doc seemed always alone. When the 



Cannery Raw 175 

lights were on and the curtains drawn, and the Gregorian 
music played on the great phonograph, Mack used to look 
down on the laboratory from the Palace Flophouse, He knew 
Doc had a girl in there, but Mack used to get a dreadful 
feeling of loneliness out of it. Even in the dear close contact 
with a girl Mack felt that Doc would be lonely. Doc was a 
night crawler The lights were on in the lab all night and 
yet he seemed to be up in the daytime too And the great 
shrouds of music came out of the lab at any time of the 
day or night. Sometimes when it was all dark and when it 
seemed that sleep had come at last, the diamond-true child 
voices of the Sistine Choir would come from the windows of 
the laboratory. 

Doc had to keep up his collecting. He tried to get to the 
good tides along the coast. The sea rocks and the beaches 
were his stock pile He knew where everything was when 
he wanted it. All the articles of his trade were filed away 
on the coast, sea cradles here, octopi here, tubs worms in 
another place, sea pansies in another. He knew where to 
get them, but he could not go for them exactly when he 
wanted For Nature locked up the items and released them 
only occasionally Doc had to know not only the tides, but 
when a particular low tide was good in a particular place. 
When such a low tide occurred, he packed his collecting 
tools in his car, he packed his jars, his bottles, his plates and 
preservatives and he went to the beach or reef or rock ledge 
where the animals he needed were stored. 

Now he had an order for small octopi and the nearest 
place to get them was the boulder-strewn inter-tidal zone at 
La Jolla, between Los Angeles and San Diego. It meant a 
five-hundred-mile drive each way and his arrival had to 
coincide with the retreating waters. 

The little octopi live among the boulders imbedded in 
sand. Being timid and young, they prefer a bottom on which 
there are many caves and little crevices and lumps of mud 



176 Cannery Row 

where they may hide from predators and protect themselves 
from the waves. But on the same fiat there are millions of 
sea cradles. While filling a definite order for octopi, Doc 
could replenish his stock of the cradles. 

Low tide was 5.17 a.m. on a Thursday. If Doc left Mon- 
terey on Wednesday morning he could be there easily in 
time for the tide on Thursday. He would have taken some- 
one with him for company, but quite by accident everyone 
was away or was busy. Mack and the boys were up Carmel 
Valley collecting frogs. Three young women he knew and 
would have enjoyed as companions had jobs and couldn’t 
get away in the middle of the week. Henri the painter was 
occupied, for Holman’s Department Store had employed 
not a flag-pole sitter, but a flag-pole skater. On a tall mast 
on top of the store he had a little round platform and there 
he was on skates going round and round. He had been there 
three days and three nights. He was out to set a new record 
for being on skates on a platform. The previous record was 
127 hours, so he had some time to go. Henri had taken up 
his post across the street at Red Williams’ petrol station. 
Henri was fascinated. He thought of doing a huge abstrac- 
tion called Substratum Dream of a Flag-pole Skater. Henri 
couldn’t leave town while the skater was up there. He pro- 
tested that there were philosophic implications in flag-pole 
skating that no one had touched. Henri sat in a chair, 
leaned back against the lattice which concealed the door of 
the men’s toilet at Red Williams’. He kept his eye on the 
eyrie skating platform and obviously he couldn’t go with 
Doc to La Jolla. Doc had to go alone because the tide would 
not wait. 

Early in the morning he got his things together. Personal 
things went in a small satchel. Another satchel held instru- 
ments and syringes. Having packed, he combed and trim- 
med his brown beard, saw that his pencils were in his shirt 
pocket, and his magnifying glass attached to his lapel. He 



Cannery Row 1 77 

packed the trays, bottles, glass plates, preservatives, rubber- 
boots and a blanket Into the back of his car. He worked 
through the pearly time, washed three days 5 dishes, put the 
garbage into the surf He closed the doors, but did not lock 
them, and by nine o’clock was on his way 

It took Doc longer to go places than other people. He 
didn’t drive fast and he stopped and ate hamburgers very 
often. Driving up to Lighthouse Avenue he waved at a dog 
that looked round and smiled at him. In Monterey before 
he even started, he felt hungry and stopped at Herman’s 
for a hamburger and beer. While he ate his sandwich and 
sipped his beer, a lot of conversation came back to him. 
Blaisedell, the poet, had said to him: ‘You love beer so 
much. I’ll bet some day you’ll go in and order a beer milk- 
shake.’ It was a simple piece of foolery, but it had bothered 
Doc ever since. He wondered what a beer milk-shake would 
taste like. The idea gagged him, but he couldn’t let it alone. 
It cropped up every time he had a glass of beer. Would it 
curdle the milk? Would you add sugar? It was like a shrimp 
ice-cream. Once the thing got into your head you couldn’t 
forget it He finished his sandwich and paid Herman. He 
purposely didn’t look at the milk-shake machines lined up 
so shiny against the back wall. If a man ordered a beer 
milk-shake, he thought, he’d better do it in a town where 
he wasn’t known. But then, a man with a beard, ordering a 
beer milk-shake in a town where he wasn’t known — they 
might call the police. A man with a beard was always a 
little suspect anyway. You couldn’t say you wore a beard 
because you like a beard. People didn’t like you for telling 
the truth. You had to say you had a scar, so you couldn’t 
shave. Once when Doc was at the University of Chicago he 
had loved trouble and he had worked too hard. He thought 
it would be nice to take a very long walk. He put on a little 
knapsack and he walked through Indiana and Kentucky 
and North Carolina and Georgia, clear to Florida. He 



1 78 Cannery Row 

walked among farmers and mountain people, among the 
swamp people and fishermen. And everywhere people asked 
Mm why he was walking through the country. 

Because he loved true things he tried to explain. He said 
he was nervous and besides he wanted to see the country, 
smell the ground and look at grass and birds and trees, to 
savour the country, and there was no other way to do it save 
on foot. And people didn't like him for telling the truth. 
They scowled, or shook and tapped their heads, they laughed 
as though they knew it was a lie and they appreciated a liar. 
And some, afraid for their daughters or their pigs, told him 
to move on, to get along, just not to stop near their place 
if he knew what was good for him. 

And so he stopped trying to tell the truth. He said he 
was doing it on a bet - that he stood to win a hundred 
dollars. Everyone liked him then and believed him. They 
asked him in to dinner and gave him a bed and they put 
lunches up for him and wished him good luck and thought 
he was a hell of a fine fellow. Doc still loved true things, 
but he knew it was not a general love and it could be a very 
dangerous mistress. 

Doc didn't stopm Salinas fora hamburger. But he stopped 
in Gonzales, in King City, and in Paso Robles. He had 
hamburger and beer at Santa Maria - two in Santa Maria, 
because it was a long pull from there to Santa Barbara. In 
Santa Barbara he had soup, lettuce and string-bean salad, 
pot roast and mashed potatoes, pineapple-pie and blue 
cheese and coffee, and after that he filled the petrol tank 
and went to the toilet. While the service station checked 
Ms oil and tyres. Doc washed Ms face and combed his beard 
and when he came back to the car a number of potential 
Mtch-hikers were waiting. 

‘Going south. Mister?' 

Doc travelled on the highways a good deal. He was an 
old hand. You have to pick your Mtch-hikers very carefully. 



Cannery Row 1 79 

It’s best to get an experienced one, for he relapses into 
silence. But the new ones try to pay for their ride by being 
interesting. Doc had had a leg talked off by some of these. 
Then after you have made up your mind about the one you 
want to take, you protect yourself by saying you aren’t 
going far. If your man turns out too much for you, you can 
drop him. On the other hand, you may be just lucky and 
get a man very much worth knowing. Doc made a quick 
survey of the line and chose his company, a thin-faced 
salesman-like man in a blue suit. He had deep lines beside 
his mouth and dark brooding eyes 

He looked at Doc with dislike. ‘Going south, Mister?’ 

‘Yes,’ said Doc, ‘a little way.’ 

‘Mind taking me along?’ 

‘Get in!’ said Doc. 

When they got to Ventura it was pretty soon after the 
heavy dinner, so Doc only stopped for beer. The hitch- 
hiker hadn’t spoken once. Doc pulled up at a roadside 
stand. 

‘Want some beer?’ 

‘No,’ said the hitch-hiker. ‘And I don’t mind saying I 
think it’s not a very good idea to drive under the influence 
of alcohol It’s none of my business what you do with your 
own life, but in this case you’ve got an automobile, and that 
can be a murderous weapon in the hands of a drunken 
drive?.’ 

At the beginning Doc had been slightly startled. ‘Get out 
of the car,’ he said softly. 

‘What?’ 

‘I’m going to punch you on the nose,’ said Doc. ‘If you 
aren’t out of this car before I count ten. One — two — 
three ...’ 

The man fumbled at the door catch and backed hurriedly 
out of the car. But once outside he howled: ‘I’m going to 
find an officer, I’m going to have you arrested.’ 



i So Cannery Row 

Doc opened the box on the dashboard and took out a 
monkey wrench. His guest saw the gesture and walked hur- 
riedly away. 

Doc walked angrily to the counter of the stand. 

The waitress, a blonde beauty with just the hint of a 
goitre, smiled at him. ‘What’ll it be?’ 

‘Beer milk-shake/ said Doc. 

‘What ? 9 

Well here it was and what the hell. Might just as well get 
it over with now as some time later. 

The blonde asked. ‘Are you kidding ? 9 

Doc knew wearily that he couldn’t explain, couldn’t tell 
the truth. Tve got a bladder complaint/ he said. ‘Bipaly- 
chaetsonectomy, the doctors call it. I’m supposed to drink a 
beer milk-shake. Doctor’s orders.’ 

The blonde smiled reassuringly. ‘Oh! I thought you was 
kidding/ she said archly. ‘You tell me how to make it. I 
didn’t know you was sick . 9 

‘Very sick/ said Doc, ‘and due to be sicker. Put in some 
milk, and add half a bottle of beer. Give me the other half 
in a glass — no sugar in the milk-shake . 5 When she served it, 
he tasted it wryly. And it wasn’t so bad - it just tasted like 
stale beer and milk. 

‘It sounds awful , 5 said the blonde 

‘It’s not so bad when you get used to it,’ said Doc. ‘I’ve 
been drinking it for seventeen years/ 


CHAPTER XVIII 

Doc had driven slowly. It was late afternoon when he 
stopped in Ventura, so late in fact that when he stopped in 
Carpentaria he only had a cheese sandwich and went to 
the toilet. Besides, he intended to get a good dinner in Los 
Angeles, and it was dark when he got there. He drove on 



Cannery Row x8i 

through and stopped at a big Chicken-in-the~Rough place 
he knew about. And there he had fried chicken, julienne 
potatoes, hot biscuits and honey, and a piece of pineapple- 
pie and blue cheese And here he filled his thermos-bottle 
with hot coffee, had them make up six ham sandwiches and 
bought two quarts of beer for breakfast. 

It was not so interesting driving at night Xo dogs to see* 
only the highway lighted with his headlights. Doc speeded 
up to finish the trip. It was about two o’clock when he got 
to La Jolla. He drove through the town and down to the 
cliff below which his tidal flat lay. There he stopped the car, 
ate a sandwich, drank some beer, turned out the lights and 
curled up in the seat to sleep. 

He didn’t need a clock. He had been "working in a tidal 
pattern so long that he could feel a tide change m his sleep. 
In the dawn he awakened, looked out through the wind- 
shield and saw that the water was already retreating down 
the bouldery flat. He drank some hot coffee, ate three sand- 
wiches and had a quart of beer. 

The tide goes out imperceptibly. The boulders show and 
seem to rise up and the ocean recedes, leaving little pools, 
leaving wet weed and moss and sponge, iridescence and 
brown and blue and China red. On the bottoms lie the in- 
credible refuse of the sea, shells broken and chipped and bits 
of skeleton, claws, the whole sea bottom a fantastic cemetery 
on which the living scamper and scramble. 

Doc pulled on his rubber-b6ots and set his rain hat fussily. 
He took his buckets and jars and his crowbar, and put his 
sandwiches in one pocket and his thermos-bottle in another 
pocket, and he went down the cliff to the tidal fiat. Then 
he worked down the flat after the retreating sea. He turned 
over the boulders with his crowbar and now and then his 
hand darted quickly into the standing-water and brought 
out a little angry squirming octopus, which blushed with 
rage and spat ink on his hand. Then he dropped it into ajar 



1 82 Cannery Row 

of sea wafer with the others, and usually the newcomer was 
so angry that it attacked its fellows. 

It was good hunting that day. He got twenty-two little 
octopi. And he picked off several hundred sea cradles and 
put them in his wooden bucket. As the tide moved out he 
followed it, while the morning came and the sun arose. The 
flat extended out two hundred yards and then there was a 
line of heavy weed-crusted rocks before it dropped off to 
deep water. Doc worked out to the barrier edge. He had 
about what he wanted now and the rest of the time he looked 
under stones, leaned down and peered into the tide pools, 
with their brilliant mosaics and their scuttling, bubbling 
life. And he came at last to the outer barrier, where the long 
leathery brown algae hung down into the water. Red star- 
fish clustered on the rocks, and the sea pulsed up and down 
against the barrier, waiting to get in again. Between two 
weeded rocks on the barrier Doc saw a flash of white under 
water and then the floating weed covered it. He climbed 
to the place over the slippery rocks, held himself firmly, and 
gently reached down and parted the brown algae. Then he 
grew rigid. A girl’s face looked up at him, a pretty, pale girl 
with dark hair. The eyes were open and clear and the face 
was firm and the hair washed gently about her head. The 
body was out of sight, caught in the crevice The lips were 
slightly parted and the teeth showed, and on the face was 
only comfort and rest. Just under water it was and the- clear 
water made it very beautiful. It seemed to Doc that he 
looked at it for many minutes, and the face burned into his 
picture memory. 

Very slowly he raised his hand and let the brown weed 
float back and cover the face. Doc’s heart pounded deeply 
and his throat felt tight. He picked up his bucket and his 
jars and his crowbar and went slowly over the slippery rocks 
back toward the beach. 

And the girl's face went ahead of him. He sat down on 



Cannery Row 183 

the beach in the coarse dry sand and pulled off his boots. 
In the jar the little octopi were huddled up, each keeping 
as far as possible from the others. Music sounded in Doc’s 
ears, a high thin piercingly sw eet flute carrying a melody he 
could never remember, and against this, a pounding surf- 
like wood-wind section. The flute went up into regions be- 
yond the hearing range and even there it earned its unbe- 
lievable melody Goose pimples came out on Doc’s arms. 
He shivered and his eyes were wet the way they get in the 
focus of great beauty. The girl’s eyes had been grey and 
clear and the dark hair floated, drifted lightly over the face. 
The picture was set for all time. He sat there while the first 
little spout of water came over the reef, bringing the return- 
ing tide. He sat there hearing the music, w T hile the sea crept 
in again over the bouldery flat. His hand tapped out the 
rhythm, and the terrifying flute played in his brain. The 
eyes were grey and the mouth smiled a little or seemed to 
catch its breath in ecstasy. 

A voice seemed to awaken him. A man stood over him. 
‘Been fishing?’ 

‘No, collecting.’ 

‘Well — what are them things ? 5 

‘Baby octopi.’ 

‘You mean devil-fish? I didn’t know there was any there. 
I’ve lived here all my life.’ 

‘YQu’ve got to look for them,’ said Doc listlessly. 

‘Say,’ said the man, ‘aren’t you feeling well? You look sick.’ 

The flute climbed again and plucked cellos sounded be- 
low and the sea crept in and in toward the beach. Doc shook 
off the music, shook off the face, shook the chill out of his 
body. ‘Is there a police station near?’ 

‘Up in town. Why, what’s wrong?’ 

‘There’s a body out on the reef . 5 

* ‘Where?’ 

‘Right out there - wedged between two rocks. A girl.’ 



184 Cannery Row 

‘Say ../ said the man ‘You get a bounty for finding a 
body. I forget how much/ 

Doc stood up and gathered his equipment. ‘Will you re- 
port it? I’m not feeling well/ 

‘Give you a shock, did it? Is it - bad? Rotten or eat up?’ 

Doc turned away. ‘You take the bounty,’ he said. ‘I don’t 
want it/ He started toward the car. Only the tiniest piping 
of the flute sounded in his head. 


CHAPTER XIX 

Probably nothing in the way of promotion Holman’s 
Department Store ever did attracted so much favourable 
comment as the engagement of the flag-pole skater. Day 
after day, there he was up on his little round platform 
skating round and round, and at night he could be seen up 
there too, dark against the sky, so that everybody knew he 
didn’t come down. It was generally agreed, however, that 
a steel rod came up through the centre of the platform at 
night and he strapped himself to it. But he didn’t sit down 
and no one minded the steel rod. People came from James- 
burg to see him and from down the coast as far as Grimes 
Point. Salinas people came over in droves and the Farmers 
Mercantile of that town put in a bid for the next appearance 
when the skater could attempt to break his own record and 
thus give the new world’s record to Salinas. Since there 
weren’t many flag-pole skaters and since this one was by 
far the best, he had for the last year gone about breaking 
his own world’s record. 

Holman’s was delighted about the venture. They had a 
white sale, a remnant sale, an aluminium sale, and a crock- 
ery sale all going at the same time. Crowds of people stood 
in the street watching the lone man on his platform. 

His second day up, he sent down word that someone was 



Cannery Row 185 

shooting at him with an air-gun The display department 
used its head. It figured the angles and located the offender. 
It was old Doctor Merrivale, hiding behind the curtains of 
his office, plugging away with a Daisy air-rifle. They didn’t 
denounce him and he promised to stop. He was very pro- 
minent in the Masonic Lodge. 

Henri the painter kept his chair at Red Williams’ service 
station. He worked out every possible philosophic approach 
to the situation and came to the conclusion that he would 
have to build a platform at home and try it himself. Every- 
one in the town was more or less affected by the skater. 
Trade fell off out of sight of him and got better the nearer 
you came to Holman’s. Mack and the boys went up and 
looked for a moment and then went back to the Palace. 
They couldn’t see that it made much sense. 

Holman’s set up a double bed in their window. When 
the skater broke the world’s record he was going to come 
down and sleep rfght in the window without taking off his 
skates. The trade name of the mattress was on a little card 
at the foot of the bed. 

Now in the whole town there was interest and discussion 
about this sporting event, but the most interesting question 
of all and the one that bothered the whole town was never 
spoken of. No one mentioned it, and yet it was there haunt- 
ing everyone. Mrs Trolat wondered about it as she came out 
of the Scotch bakery with a bag of sweet buns. Mr Hall in 
men’s furnishings wondered about it. The three Willoughby 
girls giggled whenever they thought of it. But no one had 
the courage to bring it into the open. 

Richard Frost, a highly-strung and brilliant young man, 
worried about it more than anyone else. It haunted him. 
Wednesday night he worried and Thursday night he fid- 
geted. Friday night he got drunk and had a fight with Ms 
wife. She cried for a while and then pretended to be asleep. 
She heard him slip from bed and go into the kitchen. He 



1 86 Cannery Row 

was getting another drink. And then she heard him dress 
quietly and go out. She cried some more then It was very 
late. Mrs Frost was sure he was going down to Dora’s Bear 
Flag. 

Richard walked sturdily down the hill through the pines 
until he came to Lighthouse Avenue. He turned left and 
went up toward Holman’s. He had the bottle in his pocket 
and just before he came to the store he took one more slug 
of it. The street lights were turned down low. The town was 
deserted. Not a soul moved. Richard stood in the middle of 
the street and looked up. 

Dimly on top of the high mast he could see the lonely 
figure of the skater. He took another drink. He cupped his 
hands and called huskily: c HeyP There was no answer. 
‘Hey!’ he called louder, and looked around to see if the cops 
had come out of their place beside the bank. 

Down from the sky came a surly reply: ‘What do you 
want? 5 

Richard cupped his hands again. ‘How - how do you - 
go to the toilet? 5 

‘I’ve got a can up here/ said the voice. 

Richard turned and walked back the way he had come. 
He walked along Lighthouse and up through the pines and 
he came to his house and let himself in. As he undressed he 
knew his wife was awake. She bubbled a little when she was 
asleep. He got into bed and she made room for him. 

‘He’s got a can up there/ Richard said. 


CHAPTER XX 

In mid-morning the Model T truck rolled triumphantly 
home to Cannery Row and hopped the gutter and creaked 
up through the weeds to its place behind Lee Chong’s. The 
boys blocked up the front wheels, drained what petrol was 



Cannery Row 187 

left Into a five-gallon can, took their frogs and went wearily 
home to the Palace Flophouse. Then Mack made a cere- 
monious visit to Lee Chong while the boys got a fire going 
in the big stove. Mack thanked Lee with dignity for lending 
the truck. He spoke of the great success of the trip, of the 
hundreds of frogs taken. Lee smiled shyly and waited for 
the inevitable. 

‘We’re in the chips/ Mack said enthusiastically. ‘Doc pays 
us a nickel a frog and we got about a thousand/ 

Lee nodded. The price was standard. Everybody knew 
that. 

‘Doc’s away/ said Mack. ‘Jesus, is he gonna be happy 
when he sees all them frogs/ 

Lee nodded again. He knew Doc was away and he also 
knew where the conversation was going. 

‘Say, by the way/ said Mack as though he had just 
thought of it. ‘We’re a little bit short right now .«/ He 
managed to make it sound like a very unusual situation. 

‘No whisky,* said Lee Chong, and he smiled. 

Mack was outraged. ‘What would we want whisky for? 
Why, we got a gallon of the finest whisky you ever laid a lip 
over — a whole full God-damned-running-over gallon. By 
the way/ he continued, ‘I and the boys would like to have 
you just step up for a snort with us. They told me to ask 
you.* 

In spite of himself Lee smiled with pleasure. They 
wouldn’t offer it if they didn’t have it. 

‘No/ said Mack, ‘I’ll lay it on the fine. I and the boys are 
pretty short and we’re pretty hungry. You know the price 
of frogs is twenty for a buck. Now Doc is away and we’re 
hungry. So what we thought is this. We don’t want to see 
you lose nothing, so we’ll make over to you twenty-five frogs 
for a buck. You got a five-frog profit there and nobody loses 
his shirt ’ 

‘No/ said Lee. ‘No money/ 



1 88 Cannery Row 

‘Well, hell, Lee, all we need is a little groceries. I’ll tell 
you what — we want to give Doc a little party when he gets 
back. We got plenty of liquor, but we’d like to get maybe 
some steaks, and stuff like that. He’s such a mce guy. Hell, 
when your wife had that bad tooth, who give her the 
laudanum?’ 

Mack had him. Lee was indebted to Doc - deeply in- 
debted. What Lee was having trouble comprehending was 
how his indebtedness to Doc made it necessary that he give 
credit to Mack. 

‘We don’t want you to have like a mortgage on frogs,’ 
Mack went on. ‘We will actually deliver right into your 
hands twenty-five frogs for every buck of groceries you let 
us have and you can come to the party too.’ 

Lee’s mind nosed over the proposition like a mouse in a 
cheese cupboard. He could find nothing wrong with it. The 
whole thing was legitimate. Frogs were cash as far as Doc 
was concerned, the price was standard and Lee had a double 
profit. He had his five-frog margin and also he had the 
grocery mark-up. The whole thing hinged on whether they 
actually had any frogs. 

‘We go see flog,’ Lee said at last. 

In front of the Palace he had a drink of the whisky, in- 
spected the damp sacks of frogs, and agreed to the trans- 
action. He stipulated, however, that he would take no dead 
frogs. Now Mack counted fifty frogs into a can and walked 
back to the grocery with Lee and got two dollars’ worth of 
bacon and eggs and bread. 

Lee, anticipating a brisk business, brought a big packing- 
case out and put it into the vegetable department. He emp- 
tied the fifty frogs into it and covered it with a wet gunny- 
sack to keep his charges happy. 

And business was brisk. Eddie sauntered down and 
bought two frogs’ worth of Bull Durham. Jones was out- 
raged a little later when the price of Coca-Cola went up 



Cannery Row 189 

from one to two frogs. In fact bitterness arose as the day 
wore on and prices went up. Steak, for instance - the very 
best steak shouldn’t have been more than ten frogs a pound* 
but Lee set it at twelve and a half Canned peaches were sky 
high, eight frogs for a No. 2 can. Lee had a stranglehold on 
the consumers. He was pretty sure that the Thrift Market 
or Holman’s would not approve of this new monetary sys- 
tem. If the boys wanted steak, they knew they had to pay 
Lee’s prices. Feeling ran high when Hazel, who had coveted 
a pair of yellow silk arm-bands for a long time, was told that 
if he didn’t want to pay thirty-five frogs for them he could 
go somewhere else. The poison of greed was already creep- 
ing into the innocent and laudable merchandising agree- 
ment. Bitterness was piling up. But in Lee’s packing-case 
the frogs were piling up too. 

Financial bitterness could not eat too deeply into Mack 
and the boys, for they were not mercantile men. They did 
not measure their joy in goods sold, their egos in bank 
balances, nor their loves in what they cost. While they were 
mildly irritated that Lee was taking them for an economic 
ride or perhaps hop, two dollars’ worth of bacon and eggs 
was in their stomachs lying right on top of a fine slug of 
whisky and right on top of the breakfast was another slug 
of whisky. And they sat in their own chairs in their own 
house and watched Darling learning to drink canned milk 
out of a sardine can. Darling was and was destined to re- 
main ti very happy dog, for in the group of five men there 
were five distinct theories of dog training, theories which 
clashed so that Darling never got any training at all. From 
the first she was a precocious bitch. She slept on the bed of 
the man who had given her the last bribe. They really stole 
for her sometimes. They wooed her away from one another. 
Occasionally all five agreed that things had to change and 
that Darling must be disciplined, but in the discussion of 
method the intention invariably drifted away. They were in 



i go Cannery Row 

love with her. They found the little puddles she left on the 
floor charming. They bored all their acquaintances with her 
cuteness and they would have killed her with food if in the 
end she hadn’t had better sense than they. 

Jones made her a bed in the bottom of the grandfather 
clock, but Darling never used it. She slept with one or 
another of them as the fancy moved her. She chewed the 
blankets, tore the mattresses, sprayed the feathers out of the 
pillows. She coquetted and played her owners against one 
another. They thought she was wonderful. Mack intended 
to teach her tricks and go in vaudeville and he didn’t even 
house-break her. 

They sat in the afternoon, smoking, digesting, consider- 
ing, and now and then having a delicate drink from the jug. 
And each time they warned that they must not take too 
much, for it was to be for Doc. They must not forget that 
for a minute. 

‘What time you figure he’ll be back?’ Eddie asked. 

‘Usually gets in about eight or nine o’clock,’ said Mack. 
‘Now we got to figure when we’re going to give it. I think 
we ought to give it to-night.’ 

‘Sure,’ the others agreed. 

‘Maybe he might be tired,’ Hazel suggested. ‘That’s a 
long drive.’ 

‘Hell/ said Jones, ‘nothing rests you like a good party. 
I’ve been so dog-tired my pants was draggin’ and then I’ve 
went to a party and felt fine.’ 

*We got to do some real thinkin’,’ said Mack ‘Where we 
going to give it - here?’ 

‘Well, Doc, he likes his music. He’s always got his phono- 
graph going at a party. Maybe he’d be more happy if we 
give it over at his place ’ 

‘You got something there,’ said Mack. ‘But I figure it 
ought to be like a surprise party. And how we going to make 
Eke it’s a party and not just us bringin’ over a jug of whisky?’ 



Cannery Row 1 91 

‘How about decorations? 5 Hughie suggested. ‘Like Fourth 
of July or Halloween.’ 

Mack’s eyes looked off into space and his lips were parted. 
He could see it all. ‘Hughie,’ he said, ‘I think you got some- 
thing there. I never would of thought you could do it, but 
by God you really rang a duck that time.’ His voice grew 
mellow and his eyes looked into the future. ‘I can just see 
it,’ he said. ‘Doc comes home. He’s tired. He drives up. 
The place is all lit up. He thinks somebody’s broke in. He 
goes up the stairs, and by God the place has got the hell 
decorated out of it. There’s crepe paper and there’s favours 
and a big cake. Jesus, he’d know it was a party then. And it 
wouldn’t be no little mouse fart party neither. And we’re 
kind of hiding so for a minute he don’t know who done it. 
And then we come out yelling. Can’t you see his face? By 
God, Hughie, I don’t know how you thought of it.’ 

Hughie blushed. His conception had been much more 
conservative, based in fact on the New Year’s party at ‘La 
Ida’, but if it was going to be like that, why Hughie was wil- 
ling to take credit. ‘I just thought it would be nice,’ he said. 

‘Well, it’s a pretty nice thing,’ said Mack, ‘and I don’t 
mind saying when the surprise kind of wears off, I’m going 
to tell Doc who thought it up.’ They leaned back and con- 
sidered the thing. And in their minds the decorated labo- 
ratory looked like the conservatory at the Hotel del Monte. 
They had a couple more drinks, just to savour the plan* 

Lee Chong kept a very remarkable store. For instance, 
most stores buy yellow-and-black crepe paper and black 
paper cats, masks and papier-mache pumpkins in October. 
There is a brisk business for Halloween and then these items 
disappear. Maybe they are sold or thrown out, but you can’t 
buy them, say, in June. The same is true of Fourth of July 
equipment, flags and bunting and sky-rockets. Where are 
they in January? Gone - no one knows where. This was not 
Lee Chong’s way. You could buy Valentines in November 



192 Cannery Row 

at Lee Chong's, shamrocks, hatchets and paper cherry-trees 
in August. He had fire-crackers he had laid up in 1920 One 
of the mysteries was where he kept his stock since his was 
not a very large store. He had bathing-suits he had bought 
when long skirts and black stockings and head bandanas 
were in style. He had bicycle clips and tatting shuttles and 
Mah Jong sets. He had badges that said ‘Remember the 
Maine' and felt pennants commemorating ‘Fighting Bob'. 
He had mementos of the Panama Pacific International Ex- 
position of 1915 - little towers of jewels And there was one 
other unorthodoxy in Lee’s way of doing business He never 
had a sale, never reduced a price and never remaindered. 
An article that cost thirty cents m 1912 still was thirty cents, 
although mice and moths might seem to some to have re- 
duced its value. But there was no question about it. If you 
wanted to decorate a laboratory in a general way, not being 
specific about the season but giving the impression of a 
cross between Saturnalia and a pageant of the Flags of all 
Nations, Lee Chong’s was the place to go for your stuff. 

Mack and the boys knew that, but Mack said: ‘Where 
we going to get a big cake? Lee hasn’t got nothing but them 
little bakery cakes.’ 

Hughie had been so successful before he tried again. 
‘Why’n’t Eddie bake a cake?’ he suggested. ‘Eddie used to 
be fry cook at the San Carlos for a while.’ 

The instant enthusiasm for the idea drove from Eddie’s 
brain the admission that he had never baked a cake. 

Mack put it on a sentimental basis besides. ‘It would 
mean more to Doc,’ he said. ‘It wouldn’t be like no God 
damned old soggy bought cake. It would have some heart 
in it. 

As the afternoon and the whisky went down the enthu- 
siasm rose. There were endless trips to Lee Chong’s. The 
frogs were gone from one sack and Lee’s packing-case was 
getting crowded. By six o’clock they had finished the gallon 



Cannery Row 193 

of whisky and were buying half-pints of Old Tennis Shoes 
at fifteen frogs a crack, but the pile of decorating materials 
was heaped on the floor of the Palace Flophouse - miles of 
crepe paper commemorating every holiday in vogue and 
some that had been abandoned. 

Eddie watched his stove like a mother hen. He was baking 
a cake in a wash-basin. The recipe was guaranteed not to 
fail by the company which made the shortening. But from 
the first the cake had acted strangely. When the batter was 
completed it writhed and panted as though animals were 
squirming and crawling inside it. Once in the oven it put 
up a bubble like a baseball which grew tight and shiny and 
then collapsed with a hissing sound. This left such a crater 
that Eddie made a new batch of batter and filled in the hole. 
And now the cake was behaving very curiously, for while 
the bottom was burning and sending out a black smoke the 
top was rising and falling glueyly with a series of little ex- 
plosions. 

When Eddie finally put it out to cool, it looked like one 
of Bel Geddes’s miniatures of a battlefield on a lava bed. 

This cake was not fortunate, for while the boys were de- 
corating the laboratory Darling ate what she could of it, 
was sick on it, and finally curled up in its still warm dough 
and went to sleep. 

But Mack and the boys had taken the crepe paper, the 
masks, the broomsticks and paper pumpkins, the red, white 
and Blue bunting, and moved over the lot and across the 
street to the laboratory They disposed of the last of the Grogs 
for a quart of Old Tennis Shoes and two gallons of 49-cent 
wine* 

‘Doc is very fond of wine,* said Mack. T think he likes 
it even better than whisky. 9 

Doc never locked the laboratory. He went on the theory 
that anyone who really wanted to break in qould easily do it, 
that people were essentially honest and that finally, there 

0 



194 Cannery Row 

wasn’t much the average person would want to steal there, 
anyway. The valuable things were books and records, sur- 
gical instruments and optical glass and such things that a 
practical working burglar wouldn’t look at twice. His theory 
had been sound as far as burglars, snatch thieves, and klep- 
tomaniacs were concerned, but it had been completely 
ineffective regarding his friends Books were often ‘borrowed*. 
No can of beans ever survived his absence, and on several 
occasions, returning late, he had found guests in his bed. 

The boys piled the decorations in the ante-room and then 
Mack stopped them. ‘What’s going to make Doc happiest?’ 
he asked. 

‘The party! 5 said Hazel. 

‘No,’ said Mack. 

‘The decorations?’ Hughie suggested He felt responsible 
for the decorations. 

‘No,’ said Mack, ‘the frogs. That’s going to make him feel 
best of all. And maybe by the time he gets here, Lee Chong 
might be closed and he can’t even see his frogs until to- 
morrow. No, sir,’ Mack cried. ‘Them frogs ought to be right 
here, right in the middle of the room with a piece of bunting 
on it and a sign that says: “Welcome Home, Doc”.’ 

The committee which visited Lee met with stem opposi- 
tion. All sorts of possibilities suggested themselves to his sus- 
picious brain. It was explained that he was going to be at 
the party so he could watch his property, that no one ques- 
tioned that they were his. Mack wrote out a paper ‘trans- 
ferring the frogs to Lee in case there should be any question. 

When his protests weakened a little they carried the pack- 
ing-case over to the laboratory, tacked red, white, and blue 
bunting over it, lettered the big sign with iodine on a card, 
and they started the decorating from there. They had 
finished the whisky by now and they really felt in a party 
mood. They criss-crossed the crepe paper, and put the 
pumpkins up. Passers-by in the street joined the party and 



Cannery Row 195 

rushed over to Lee’s to get more to drink. Lee Chong joined 
the party for a while, but his stomach was notoriously weak 
and he got sick and had to go home. At eleven o’clock they 
fried the steaks and ate them. Someone digging through the 
records found an album of Count Basie and the great phono- 
graph roared out The noise could be heard from the boat* 
works to € La Ida’. A group of customers from the Bear Flag 
mistook Western Biological for a rival house and charged 
up the stairs whooping with joy. They were evicted by the 
outraged hosts, but only after a long, happy, and bloody 
battle that took out the front door and broke two windows. 
The crashing of jars was unpleasant. Hazel going through 
the kitchen to the toilet tipped the frying-pan of hot grease 
on himself and the floor and was badly burned. 

At one-thirty a drunk wandered in and passed a remark 
which was considered insulting to Doc. Mack hit him a 
clip which is still remembered and discussed. The man rose 
off his feet, described a small arc, and crashed through the 
packing-case in among the frogs. Someone trying to change 
a record dropped the tone arm down and broke the crystal. 

No one has studied the psychology of a dying party* It 
may be raging, howling, boiling, and then a fever sets in 
and a little silence and then quickly quickly it is gone, the 
guests go home or go to sleep or wander away to some other 
affair and they leave a dead body. 

The lights blazed in the laboratory. The front door hung 
sideways by one hinge. The floor was littered with broken 
glass. Phonograph records, some broken, some only nicked, 
were strewn about. The plates with pieces of steak ends and 
coagulating grease were on the floor, on top of the book- 
cases, under the bed Whisky-glasses lay sadlv on their sides. 
Someone trying to climb the bookcases had pulled out a 
whole section of books and spilled them in broken-backed 
confusion on the floor. And it was empty, it was over. 

Through the broken end of the packing-caseafrog hopped 



196 Cannery Row 

and sat feeling the air for danger, and then another joined 
him. They could smell the fine, damp, cool air coming m 
the door and m through the broken windows. One of them 
sat on the fallen card which said* ‘Welcome Home, Doc.* 
And then the cwo hopped timidly toward the door. 

For quite a while a little river of frogs hopped down the 
steps, a swirling, moving river. For quite a while Cannery 
Row crawled with frogs - was overrun with frogs. A taxi 
which brought a very late customer to the Bear Flag 
squashed five frogs m the street. But well before dawn they 
had all gone. Some found the sewer and some worked their 
way up the hill to the reservoir and some went into culverts 
and some only hid among the weeds in the vacant lot. 

And the lights blazed in the quiet empty laboratory. 


CHAPTER XXI 

In the back room of the laboratory the white rats in their 
cages ran and skittered and squeaked. In the corner of a 
separate cage a mother rat lay over her litter of blind, naked 
children and let them suckle and the mother stared about 
nervously and fiercely. 

In the rattlesnake cage the snakes lay with their chins rest- 
ing on their own coils and they stared straight ahead out 
of their scowling dusty black eyes. In another cage a Gila 
monster with a skin like a beaded bag reared slowly up and 
clawed heavily and sluggishly at the wire. The anemones in 
the aquaria blossomed open, with green and purple ten- 
tacles and pale green stomachs. The little sea-water pump 
whirred softly and the needles of driven water hissed into 
the tanks, forcing lines of bubbles under the surface. 

It was the hour of the pearl. Lee Chong brought his gar- 
bage cans out to the kerb. The bouncer stood on the porch 
of the Bear Flag and scratched his stomach. Sam Malloy 



Cannery Row 197 

crawled out of the boiler and sat on his wood block and 
looked at the lightening east. Over on the rocks near Hop- 
kins Marine Station the sea-lions barked monotonously. 
The old Chinaman came up out of the sea with his dripping 
basket and flip-flapped up the hill. 

Then a car turned into Cannery Row and Doc drove up 
to the front of the laboratory. His eyes were red-rimmed 
with fatigue. He moved slowly with tiredness. When the car 
had stopped, he sat still for a moment to let the road jumps 
get out of his nerves. Then he climbed out of the car. At his 
step on the stairs, the rattlesnakes ran out their tongues and 
listened with their waving forked tongues. The rats scam- 
pered madly about the cages. Doc climbed the stairs. He 
looked in wonder at the sagging door and at the broken 
window. The weariness seemed to go out of him. He stepped 
quickly inside. Then he went quickly from room to room, 
stepping round the broken glass. He bent down quickly and 
picked up a smashed phonograph record and looked at its 
title. 

In the kitchen the spilled grease had turned white on the 
floor. Doc’s eyes flamed red with anger. He sat down on his 
couch and his head settled between his shoulders and his 
body weaved a little in his rage. Suddenly he jumped up 
and turned on the power in his great phonograph. He put 
on a record and put down the arm. Only a hissing roar came 
from the loud-speaker. He lifted the arm, stopped the turn- 
table, and sat down on the couch again. 

On the stairs there were bumbling uncertain footsteps and 
through the door came Mack. His face was red. He stood 
uncertainly in the middle of the room. 'Doc he said — T 
and the boys ... s 

For the moment Doc hadn’t seemed to see him. Now he 
leaped to his feet. Mack shuffled backward. 'Did you do 
this?’ 

'Well, I and the boys Doc’s small hard fist whipped 



ig8 Cannery Row 

out and splashed against Mack’s mouth Doc’s eyes shone 
with a red animal rage Mack sat down heavily on the floor. 
Doc’s fist was hard and sharp Mack’s lips were split against 
his teeth and one front tooth bent sharply inward. ‘Get up 1 ’ 
said Doc 

Mack lumbered to his feet His hands were at his sides. 
Doc hit him again, a cold, calculated, punishing punch in 
the mouth. The blood spurted from Mack’s lips and ran 
down his chm He tried to lick his lips. 

‘Put up your hands Fight, you son of a bitch,’ Doc cried, 
and he hit him again and heard the crunch of breaking 
teeth. 

Mack’s head jolted, but he was braced now so he wouldn’t 
fall. And his hands stayed at his side. ‘Go ahead, Doc,’ he 
said thickly through his broken lips. ‘I got it coming ’ 

Doc’s shoulders sagged with defeat ‘You son of a bitch,’ 
he said bitterly. ‘Oh, you dirty son of a bitch.’ He sat down 
on the couch and looked at his cut knuckles. 

Mack sat down in a chair and looked at him Mack’s eyes 
were wide and full of pain. He didn’t even wipe away the 
blood that flowed down his chm In Doc’s head the mono- 
tonal opening of Monteverdi’s Hor ck ’ el Ciel e la Terra began 
to form, the infinitely sad and resigned mourning of Petrarch 
for Laura. Doc saw Mack’s broken mouth through the 
music, the music that was in his head and in the air. Mack 
sat perfectly still, almost as though he could hear the music 
too. Doc glanced at the place where the Monteverdi album 
was and then he remembered that the phonograph was 
broken. 

He got to his feet. ‘Go wash your face,’ he said, and he 
went out and down the stairs and across the street to Lee 
Chong’ s. Lee wouldn’t look at him as he got two quarts of 
beer out of the ice-box. He took the money without saying 
anything. Doc walked across the street. 

Mack was in the toilet cleaning his bloody face with wet 



Cannery Row 199 

paper towels. Doc opened a bottle and poured gently into a 
glass* holding it at an angle so that very little collar rose to 
the top. He filled a second tall glass and carried the two 
into the front room. Mack came back dabbing at his month 
with wet towelling. Doc indicated the beer with his head. 
Now Mack opened his throat and poured down half the 
glass without swallowing. He sighed explosively and stared 
into the beer. Doc had already finished his glass. He brought 
the bottle in and filled both glasses again. He sat down on 
his couch. 

‘What happened? 5 he asked. 

Mack looked at the floor and a drop of blood fell from his 
lips to his beer. He mopped his split lips again ‘I and the 
boys wanted to give you a party. We thought you’d be home 
last night/ 

Doc nodded his head. ‘I see/ 

‘She got out of hand/ said Mack. ‘It don’t do no good to 
say I’m sorry. I been sorry all my life. This ain’t no new 
thing. It’s always like this/ He swallowed deeply from his 
glass. ‘I had a wife/ Mack said. ‘Same thing. Everything 
I done turned sour. She couldn’t stand it any more. If I 
done a good thing it got poisoned up some way. If I give 
her a present they was something wrong with it. She only 
got hurt from me. She couldn’t stand it no more. Same 
thing ever’ place ’til I just got to clowning. I don’t do nothin’ 
but clown no more. Try to make the boys laugh/ 

Doc nodded again. The music was sounding in his head 
again, complaint and resignation all in one. ‘I know,’ he 
said. 

‘I was glad when you hit me/ Mack went on. ‘I thought 
to myself: “Maybe this will teach me. Maybe I’ll remember 
this/’ But, hell, I won’t remember nothin’. I won’t learn 
nothin’. Doc/ Mack cried, ‘the way I seen it, we was all 
happy and havin’ a good time. You was glad because we 
was givin’ you a party. And we was glad. The way I seen it. 



200 Cannery Row 

it was a good party.’ He waved his hand at the wreckage 
on the floor. ‘Same thing when I was married. I’d think 
her out and then - but it never come off that way.’ 

‘I know,* said Doc. He opened the second quart of beer 
and poured the glasses full. 

‘Doc,’ said Mack. ‘I and the boys will clean up here - and 
we’ll pay for the stuff that’s broke If it takes us five years 
we’ll pay for it.’ 

Doc shook his head slowly and wiped the beer foam from 
his moustache. ‘No,’ he said, ‘I’ll clean it up. I know where 
everything goes.’ 

‘We’ll pay for it, Doc.’ 

‘No you won’t. Mack,’ said Doc. ‘You’ll think about it 
and it’ll worry you for quite a long time, but you won’t pay 
for it. There’s maybe three hundred dollars in broken 
museum glass. Don’t say you’ll pay for it. That will just keep 
you uneasy. It might be two or three years before you for- 
got about it and felt entirely easy again. And you wouldn’t 
pay it, anyway.’ 

‘I guess you’re right,’ said Mack. ‘God damn it, I know 
you’re right. What can we do?’ 

*I’m over it,’ said Doc. ‘Those socks in the mouth got 
it out of my system. Let’s forget it.’ 

Mack finished his beer and stood up. ‘So long, Doc,’ he 
said. 

‘So long. Say, Mack - what happened to your wife?’ 

*1 don’t know,’ said Mack. ‘She went away.’ He walked 
clumsily down the stairs and crossed over and walked up 
the lot and up the chicken walk to the Palace Flophouse. Doc 
watched his progress through the window. And then wearily 
he got a broom from behind the water-heater. It took him 
all day to clean up the mess. 



Cannery Row 


CHAPTER XXII 

Henri the painter was not French and Ms name was not 
Henri. Also he was not really a painter, Henri had so 
steeped himself in stories of the Left Bank in Paris that he 
lived there although he had never been there. Feverishly he 
followed in periodicals the Dadaist movements and sc hisms , 
the strangely feminine jealousies and religiousness, the 
obscurantisms of the forming and breaking schools. Regu- 
larly he revolted against outworn techniques and materials. 
One season he threw out perspective. Another year he 
abandoned red, even as the mother of purple. Finally he 
gave up paint entirely. It is not known whether Henri was 
a good painter or not, for he threw himself so violently into 
movements that he had very little time left for painting of 
any kind. 

About his painting there is some question. You couldiTt 
judge very much from his productions in different coloured 
chicken feathers and nut-shells. But as a boat-builder he 
was superb. Henri was a wonderful craftsman. He had lived 
in a tent years ago when he started Ms boat and until galley 
and cabin were complete enough to move into. But once he 
was housed and dry he had taken Ms time on the boat. The 
boat was sculptured rather than built. It was tMrty-five feet 
long,and its lines were m a constant state of flux. For a while 
it had a clipper bow and a fan-tail like a destroyer. Another 
time it had looked vaguely like a caravel. Since Henri had 
no money, it sometimes took Mm months to find a plank or 
a piece of iron or a dozen brass screws. That was the way 
he wanted it, for Henri never wanted to finish Ms boat. 

It sat among the pine-trees on a lot Henri rented for five 
dollars a year. This paid the taxes and satisfied the owner. 
The boat rested in a cradle on concrete foundations, A rope 
ladder hung over the side except when Henri was at home. 



202 Cannery Row 

Then he pulled up the rope ladder and only put it down 
when guests arrived. His little cabin had a wide padded seat 
that ran round three sides of the room On this he slept and 
on this his guests sat. A table folded down when it was 
needed and a brass lamp hung from the ceiling. His galley 
was a marvel of compactness, but every item m it had been 
the result of months of thought and work. 

Henri was swarthy and morose. He wore a beret long 
after other people abandoned them, he smoked a calabash 
pipe and his dark hair fell about his face. Henri had many 
friends whom he loosely classified as those who could feed 
him and those whom he had to feed. His boat had no name. 
Henri said he would name it when it was finished. 

Henri had been living in and building his boat for ten 
years. During that time he had been married twice and had 
promoted a number of semi-permanent liaisons. And all of 
these young women had left him for the same reason. The 
seven-foot cabin was too small for two people. They resented 
bumping their heads when they stood up and they definitely 
felt the need for a toilet Marine toilets obviously would not 
work in a shore-bound boat, and Henri refused to com- 
promise with a spurious landsman’s toilet. He and his friend 
of the moment had to stroll away among the pines. And one 
after another his loves left him. 

Just after the girl he had called Alice left him, a very 
curious thing happened to Henri. Each time he was left 
alone, he mourned formally for a while, but actually he felt 
a sense of relief He could stretch out in his little cabin. He 
could eat what he wanted. He was glad to be free of the end- 
less female biologic functions for a while. 

It had become his custom, each time he was deserted, to 
buy a gallon of wine, to stretch out on the comfortably hard 
bunk and get drunk. Sometimes he cried a little all by him- 
self, but it was luxurious stuff and he usually had a wonder- 
ful feeling of well-being from it. He would read Rimbaud 



Cannery Row 203 

aloud with a very bad accent, marvelling the while at Ms 
fluid speech. 

It was during one of his ritualistic mournings for the lost 
Alice that the strange thing began to happen It was night 
and his lamp was burmng and he had just barely begun to 
get drunk when suddenly he knew he was no longer alone. 
He let his eye wander cautiously up and across the cabin, 
and there on the other side sat a devilish young man, a dark, 
handsome young man. His eyes gleamed with cleverness 
and spirit and energy and his teeth flashed. There was some- 
thing very dear and yet very terrible in his face And beside 
him sat a golden-haired little boy, hardly more than a baby. 
The man looked down at the baby and the baby looked 
back and laughed delightedly as though something wonder- 
ful were about to happen. Then the man looked over at 
Henri and smiled and he glanced back at the baby. From 
his upper left vest pocket he took an old-fashioned straight- 
edged razor. He opened it and indicated the child with a 
gesture of his head. He put a hand among the curls and the 
baby laughed gleefully, and then the man tilted the chin 
and cut the baby’s throat and the baby went right on laugh- 
ing. But Henri was howling with terror. It took him a long 
time to realize that neither the man nor the baby was still 
there. 

Henri, when his shaking had subsided a little, rushed out 
of hi§ cabin, leaped over the side of the boat and hurried 
away down the hill through the pines. He walked for several 
hours and at last he walked down to Cannery Row. 

Doc was in the basement working on cats when Henri 
burst in. Doc went on working while Henri told about it, 
and when it was over Doc looked closely at him to see how 
much actual fear and how much theatre was there. And it 
was mostly fear. 

‘Is it a ghost, do you think?’ Henri demanded. Ts it some 
reflection of something that has happened or is it some 



204 Cannery Row 

Freudian horror out of me, or am I completely nuts? I saw it, 
I tell you. It happened right in front of me as plainly as I see 
you/ 

*1 don’t know/ said Doc. 

‘Well, will you come up with me, and see if it comes back?’ 

‘No/ said Doc. ‘If I saw it, it might be a ghost and it 
would scare me badly because I don’t believe in ghosts. And 
if you saw it again and I didn’t it would be a hallucination 
and you would be frightened.’ 

‘But what am I going to do?’ Henri asked. ‘If I see it 
again I’ll know what’s going to happen and I’m sure I’ll die* 
You see, he doesn’t look like a murderer. He looks nice and 
the kid looks nice and neither of them give a damn. But he 
cut that baby’s throat. I saw it.’ 

‘I don’t know,’ said Doc. ‘I’m not a psychiatrist or a 
witch-hunter and I’m not going to start now. 9 

A girl’s voice called into the basement. ‘Hi, Doc, can I 
come in? 9 

‘Come along, 9 said Doc. 

She was a rather pretty and a very alert girl. 

Doc introduced her to Henri. 

‘He’s got a problem/ said Doc. ‘He either has a ghost or a 
terrible conscience and he doesn’t know which. Tell her 
about it, Henri/ 

Henri went over the story again and the girl’s eyes 
sparkled. 

‘But that’s horrible/ she said when he finished. ‘I’ve never 
in my life even caught the smell of a ghost. Let’s go back up 
and see if he comes again/ 

Doc watched them go a little sourly^ After all, it had been 
his date. 

The girl never did see the ghost, but she was fond of Henri, 
and it was five months before the cramped cabin and the 
lack of a toilet drove her out. 



Cannery Row 


CHAPTER XXIII 

A black gloom settled over the Palace Flophouse. All the 
joy went out of it. Mack came back from the laboratory with 
his mouth torn and his teeth broken. As a kind of penance, 
he did not wash his face. He went to his bed and pulled his 
blanket over his head and he didn’t get up all day. His 
heart was as bruised as his mouth He went over all the bad 
things he had done in his life and everything he had ever 
done seemed bad. He was very sad. 

Hughie and Jones sat for a while staring into space and 
then morosely they went over to the Hediondo Cannery and 
applied for jobs and got them. 

Hazel felt so bad that he walked to Monterey and picked 
a fight with a soldier and lost it on purpose. That made him 
feel a little better to be utterly beaten by a man Hazel could 
have licked without half trying. 

Darling was the only happy one of the whole club. She 
spent the day under Mack’s bed happily eating up his shoes. 
She was a clever dog and her teeth were very sharp. Twice 
in his black despair. Mack reached under the bed and caught 
her and put her in bed with him for company, but she 
squirmed out and went back to eating his shoes. 

Eddie mooned on down to ‘La Ida’ and talked to his 
friend the bar-tender. He got a few drinks and borrowed 
some nickels with which he played Melancholy Baby five times 
on the musical-box. 

Mack and the boys were under a cloud and they knew it, 
and they knew they deserved it. They had become social 
outcasts. All their good intentions were forgotten now. 
The fact that the party was given for Doc, if it was known, 
was never mentioned or taken into consideration. The story 
ran through the Bear Flag. It was told in the canneries. At 
‘La Ida 5 drunks discussed it virtuously. Lee Chong refused 



2g6 Cannery Row 

to comment. He was feeling financially bruised. And the 
story as it grew went this way: They had stolen liquor and 
money. They had maliciously broken into the laboratory 
and systematically destroyed it out of pure malice and evil. 
People who really knew better took this view. Some of the 
drunks at ‘La Ida* considered going over and beating the 
hell out of the whole lot of them to show them they couldn’t 
do a thing like that to Doc. 

Only a sense of the solidarity and fighting ability of Mack 
and the boys saved them from some kind of reprisal. There 
were people who felt virtuous about the affair who hadn’t 
had the material of virtue for a long time. The fiercest of 
the whole lot was Tom Sheligan, who would have been at 
the party if he had known about it. 

Socially Mack and the boys were beyond the pale. Sam 
Malloy didn’t speak to them as they went by the boiler. 
They drew into themselves and no one could foresee how 
they would come out of the cloud. For there are two possible 
reactions to social ostracism — either a man emerges deter- 
mined to be better, purer, and kindlier or he goes bad, chal- 
lenges the world and does even worse things. This last is by 
far the commonest reaction to stigma. 

Mack and the boys balanced on the scales of good and 
evil. They were kind and sweet to Darling: they were for- 
bearing and patient with one another. When the first re- 
action was over they gave the Palace Flophouse a cleaning 
such as it had never had. They polished the bright work on 
the stove and they washed all their clothes and blankets. 
Financially they had become dull and solvent. Hughie 
and Jones were working and bringing home their pay. 
They bought groceries up the hill at the Thrift Market 
because they could not stand the reproving eyes of Lee 
Chong. 

It was during this time that Doc made an observation 
which may have been true, but since there was one factor 



Cannery Row 207 

missing in his reasoning it is not known whether he was cor- 
rect. It was the Fourth ofjuly. Doc was sitting in the labora- 
tory with Richard Frost. They drank beer and listened to 
a new album of Scarlatti and looked out the window. In 
front of the Palace Flophouse there was a large log of wood 
where Mack and the boys were sitting in the mid-morning 
sun. They faced down the hill toward the laboratory. 

Doc said: ‘Look at them. There are your true philoso- 
phers. I think/ he went on, ‘that Mack and the boys know 
everything that has ever happened in the world and possibly 
everything that will happen. I think they survive in this 
particular world better than other people. In a time when 
people tear themselves to pieces with ambition and nervous- 
ness and covetousness, they are relaxed. All of our so-called 
successful men are sick men, with bad stomachs, and bad 
souls, but Mack and the boys are healthy and curiously clean* 
They can do what they want. They can satisfy their appe- 
tites without calling them something else 5 This speech so 
dried out Doc’s throat that he drained his beer glass. He 
waved two fingers in the air and smiled. ‘There’s nothing 
like that first taste of beer/ he said. 

Richard Frost said. T think they’re just like anyone else. 
They just haven’t any money.’ 

‘They could get it/ Doc said. ‘They could ruin their lives 
and get money. Mack has qualities of genius. They’re all 
very clever if they want something. They just know the 
nature of things too well to be caught in that wanting.’ 

If Doc had known of the sadness of Mack and the boys 
he would not have made the next statement, but no one had 
told him about the social pressure that was exerted against 
the inmates of the Palace. 

He poured beer slowly into his glass. T think I can show 
you proof/ he said. ‘You see how they are sitting facing this 
way? Well — in about half an hour the Fourth ofjuly Parade 
is going to pass on Lighthouse Avenue. By just turning their 



210 Cannery Row 

the hoys seemed to be the node of trouble. The nice bouncer 
at the Bear Flag threw out a drunk, but threw Mm too hard 
and too far and broke his back. Alfred had to go over to 
Salinas three times before it was cleared up, and that didn’t 
make Alfred feel very well. Ordinarily he was too good a 
bouncer to hurt anyone. His A and G was a miracle of 
rhythm and grace. 

On top of that a group of high-minded ladies in the town 
demanded that the dens of vice must close to protect young 
American manhood. This happened about once a year in 
the dead period between the Fourth of July and the County 
Fair. Dora usually closed the Bear Flag for a week when it 
happened. It wasn’t so bad. Everyone got a vacation and 
little repairs to the plumbing and the walls could be made. 
But this year the ladies went on a real crusade. They wanted 
somebody’s scalp. It had been a dull summer and they were 
restless. It got so bad that they had to be told who actually 
owned the property where vice was practised, what the rents 
were and what little hardships might be the result of their 
closing That was how close they were to being a serious 
menace. 

Dora was closed a full two weeks and there were three 
conventions in Monterey wMle the Bear Flag was closed. 
Word got around and Monterey lost five conventions for the 
following year. Things were bad all over. Doc had to get a 
loan at the bank to pay for the glass that was broken at^the 
party. Elmer Rechati went to sleep on the Southern Pacific 
track and lost both legs, A sudden and completely unex- 
pected storm tore a purse-seiner and three lampara boats 
loose from their moorings and tossed them broken and sad 
on Del Monte beach. 

There is no explaining a series of misfortunes like that. 
Every man blames himself. People in their black minds re- 
member sins committed secretly and wonder whether they 
have caused the evil sequence. One man may put it down 



211 


Cannery Rom 

to sun-spots while another invoking the law of probabilities 
doesn’t believe it. Not even the doctors had a good time of 
it, for while many people were sick none of it was good- 
paying sickness. It was nothing a good physic or a patent 
medicine wouldn’t take care of. 

And to cap it all, Darling got sick. She was a very fat and 
lively puppy when she was struck down, but five days of 
fever reduced her to a little skin-covered skeleton. Her liver- 
coloured nose was pink and her gums were w hite. Her eyes 
glazed with illness and her whole body was hot, although 
she trembled sometimes with cold. She wouldn’t eat and she 
wouldn’t drmk and her fat little belly shrivelled up against 
her spine, and even her tail showed the articulations through 
the skin. It was obviously distemper. 

Now a genuine panic came over the Palace Flophouse. 
Darling had come to be vastly important to them. Hughie 
and Jones instantly quit their jobs so they could be near to 
help. They sat up in shifts They kept a cool, damp cloth on 
her forehead and she got weaker and weaker Finally, al- 
though they didn’t want to, Hazel and Jones were chosen to 
call on Doc. They found him working over a tide-chart while 
he ate a chicken stew of which the principal ingredient was 
not chicken but sea cucumber. They thought he looked at 
them a little coldly. 

‘It’s Darling,’ they said. ‘She’s sick.’ 

‘What’s the matter with her?’ 

‘Mack says it’s distemper.’ 

‘I’m no veterinarian,’ said Doc. ‘I don’t know how to 
treat these things.’ 

Hazel said: ‘Well, couldn’t you just take a look at her? 
She’s sick as hell.’ 

They stood in a circle while Doc examined Darling. He 
looked at her eyeballs and her gums and felt in her ear for 
fever. He ran his finger over the ribs that stuck out like 
spokes and at the poor spine. ‘She won’t eat?’ he asked. 



212 Cannery Row 

‘Not a thing/ said Mack. 

‘You’ll have to force feed her - strong soups and eggs and 
cod liver oil/ 

They thought he was cold and professional. He went back 
to his tide-charts and his stew. 

But Mack and the boys had something to do now. They 
boiled meat until it was as strong as whisky. They put cod 
liver oil far back on her tongue so that some of it got down 
her. They held up her head and made a little funnel of her 
chops and poured the cool soup in. She had to swallow or 
drown. Every two hours they fed her and gave her water. 
Before they had slept in shifts - now no one slept. They sat 
silently and waited for Darling’s crisis. 

It came early in the morning. The boys sat in their chairs 
half asleep, but Mack was awake and his eyes were on the 
puppy. He saw her ears flip twice, and her chest heave. With 
infinite weakness she climbed slowly to her spindly legs, 
dragged herself to the door, took four laps of water and col- 
lapsed on the floor. 

Mack shouted the others awake. He danced heavily. All 
the boys shouted at one another. Lee Chong heard them 
and snorted to himself as he carried out the garbage cans. 
Alfred the bouncer heard them and thought they were 
having a party. 

By nine o’clock Darling had eaten a raw egg and half a 
pint of whipped cream by herself. By noon she was visibly 
putting on weight. In a day she romped a little and by the 
end of the week she was a well dog. 

At last a crack had developed in the wall of evil. There 
were evidences of it everywhere. The purse-seiner was 
hauled back into the water and floated. Word came down 
to Dora that it was all right to open up the Bear Flag. Earl 
Wakefield caught a sculpin with two heads and sold it to 
the museum for eight dollars. The wall of evil and of waiting 
was broken. It broke away in chunks. The curtains were 



Cannery Raw 213 

drawn at the laboratory that night and Gregorian music 
played until two o’clock and then the music stopped and no 
one came out. Some force wrought with Lee Chong’s heart 
and all in an Oriental moment he forgave Mack and the 
boys and wrote off the frog debt, which had been a mone- 
tary headache from the beginning. And to prove to the boys 
that he had forgiven them he took a pint of Old Tennis 
Shoes up and presented it to them. Their trading at the 
Thrift Market had hurt his feelings, but it was all over now. 
Lee’s visit coincided with the first destructive healthy im- 
pulse Darling had since her illness. She was completely 
spoiled nowand no one thought of housebreaking her. When 
Lee Chong came in with his gift. Darling was deliberately and 
happily destroying Hazel’s only pair of rubber-boots, while 
her happy masters applauded her. 

Mack never visited the Bear Flag professionally. It would 
have seemed a little like incest to him. There was a house 
out by the baseball park he patronized Thus, when he went 
into the front bar, everyone thought he wanted a beer. He 
stepped up to Alfred. ‘Dora around?’ he asked. 

‘What do you want with her?’ Alfred asked. 

T got something I want to ask her.’ 

‘What about?’ 

‘That’s none of your God damn business,’ said Mack. 

‘Okay. Have it your way. I’ll see if she wants to talk to 
you * 

A moment later he led Mack into the sanctum. Dora sat 
at a roll-top desk Her orange hair was piled in ringlets on her 
head and she wore a green eyeshade. With a stub pen she 
was bringing her books up-to-date, a fine old double-entry 
ledger. She was dressed in a magnificent pmk silk wrapper 
with lace at the wrists and throat. When Mack came in she 
whirled her pivot-chair about and faced him Alfred stood 
In the door and waited. Mack stood until Alfred closed the 
door and left. 



214 Cannery Row 

Dora scrutinized him suspiciously, "Well - what can I do 
for you? 5 she demanded at last. 

‘You see, ma’am/ said Mack ‘Well I guess you heard 
what we done over at Doc’s some time back/ 

Dora pushed the eyeshade back up on her head and she 
put the pen m an old-fashioned coil-spring holder. ‘Yeah!’ 
she said. ‘I heard/ 

‘Well, ma’am, we did it for Doc. You may not believe it, 
but we wanted to give him a party. Only he didn’t get home 
in time and - well, she got out of hand/ 

‘So I heard,’ said Dora. ‘Well, what you want me to do?’ 

‘Well,’ said Mack, ‘I and the boys thought we’d ask you. 
You know what we think of Doc. We wanted to ask you 
what you thought we could do for him that would kind of 
show him/ 

Dora said: ‘Hum/ and she flopped back in her pivot-chair 
and crossed her legs and smoothed her wrapper over her 
knees. She shook out a cigarette, lighted it and studied. ‘You 
gave him a party he didn’t get to. Why don’t you give him 
a party he does get to?’ she said. 

‘Jesus/ said Mack afterwards talking to the boys. ‘It was 
just as simple as that. Now there is one hell of a woman. No 
wonder she got to be madam. There is one hell of a woman/ 


CHAPTER XXIV 

Mary Talbot, Mrs Tom Talbot, that is, was lovely. She 
had red hair with green lights in it. Her skin was golden, 
with a green under-cast, and her eyes were green, with little 
golden spots. Her face was triangular, with wide cheek- 
bones, wide-set eyes, and her chin was pointed. She had long 
dancer’s legs and dancer’s feet, and she seemed never to 
touch the ground when she walked* When she was excited, 
and she was excited a good deal of the time, her face flushed 



Cannery Row 215 

with gold. Her great-great-great-great-great grandmother 
had been burned as a witch. 

More than anything in the world Mary Talbot loved 
parties* She loved to give parties and she loved to go to 
parties Since Tom Talbot didn’t make much money Mary 
couldn’t give parties all the time, so she tricked people into 
giving them. Sometimes she telephoned a fnend and said 
bluntly: Tsn’t it about time you gave a party?’ 

Regularly, Mary had six birthdays a year, and she organ- 
Ized costume parties, surprise parties, holiday parties, Christ- 
mas Eve at her house was a very exciting thing* For Mary 
glowed with parties. She carried her husband along on the 
wave of her excitement. 

In the afternoons when Tom was at work Mary sometimes 
gave tea-parties for the neighbourhood cats. She set a foot- 
stool with doll cups and saucers. She gathered the cats, and 
there were plenty of them, and then she held long and de- 
tailed conversations with them. It was a kind of play she 
enjoyed very much - a kind of satiric game, and it covered 
and concealed from Mary the fact that she didn’t have very 
nice clothes and the Talbots didn’t have any money. They 
were pretty near absolute bottom most of the time, and 
when they really scraped, Mary managed to give some kind 
of a party. 

She could do that. She could infect a whole house with 
gaiety and she used her gift as a weapon against the despon- 
dency that lurked always around outside the house waiting 
to get in at Tom. That was Mary’s job as she saw it - to keep 
the despondency away from Tom because everyone knew 
he was going to be a great success some time* Mostly she 
was successful in keeping the dark things out of the house, 
but sometimes they got in at Tom and laid him out* Then 
he would sit and brood for hours, while Mary frantically 
built up a back-fire of gaiety. 

One time when it was the first of the month and there 



2x6 Cannery Row 

were curt notes from the water company and the rent wasn’t 
paid and a manuscript had come back from Collier's and the 
cartoons had come back from The Mew Yorker and pleurisy 
was hurting Tom pretty badly, he went into the bedroom 
and lay down on the bed. 

Mary came softly m, for the blue-grey colour of his gloom 
had seeped out under the door and through the keyhole. 
She had a little bouquet of candytuft in a collar of paper 
lace. 

‘Smell/ she said and held the bouquet to his nose. He 
smelled the flowers and said nothing. ‘Do you know what 
day this is?* she asked and thought wildly for something to 
make it a bright day. 

Tom said: ‘Why don’t we face it for once? We’re down. 
We’re going under. What’s the good kidding ourselves?’ 

‘No we’re not,’ said Mary. ‘We’re magic people. We al- 
ways have been Remember that ten dollars you found in 
a book - remember when your cousin sent you five dollars? 
Nothing can happen to us.’ 

‘Well, it has happened,’ said Tom. ‘I’m sorry,’ he said. 
‘I just can’t talk myself out of it this time. I’m sick of pre- 
tending everything. For once I’d like to have it real - just 
for once.’ 

‘I thought of giving a little party to-night/ said Mary. 

‘On what? You’re not going to cut out the baked ham 
picture from a magazine again and serve it on a platter, are 
you? I’m sick of that kind of kidding. It isn’t funny any more. 
It’s sad.’ 

‘I could give a little party/ she insisted. ‘Just a small affair. 
Nobody will dress. It’s the anniversary of the founding of 
the Bloomer League - you didn’t even remember that/ 

‘It’s no use/ said Tom. ‘I know it’s mean, but I just can’t 
rise to it. Why don’t you just go out and shut the door and 
leave me alone? I’ll get you down if you don’t/ 

She looked at him closely and saw that he meant it. Mary 



Cannery Row 217 

walked quietly out and shut the door, and Tom turned over 
on the bed and put his face down between his arms. He 
could hear her rustling about in the other room. 

She decorated the door with old Christmas things, glass- 
balls, and tinsel, and she made a placard that said - 4 Welcome 
Tom, our Hero 5 She listened at the door and she couldn’t 
hear anything. A little disconsolately she got out the foot- 
stool and spread a napkin over it. She put her bouquet in 
a glass in the middle of the footstool and set out four little 
cups and saucers. She went into the kitchen, put the tea in 
the teapot and set the kettle to boil. Then she went out into 
the yard. 

Kitty Randolph was sunning herself by the front fence. 
Mary said: 4 Miss Randolph - Fm having a few friends in 
to tea if you would care to come.’ Kitty Randolph rolled 
over languorously on her back and stretched in the warm 
sun. "Don’t be later than four o’clock,’ said Mary. ‘My hus- 
band and I are going to the Bloomer League Centennial 
Reception at the Hotel ’ 

She strolled round the house to the backyard, where the 
blackberry vines clambered over the fence. Kitty Casini was 
squatting on the ground growling to herself and flicking 
her tail fiercely. "Mrs Casini,’ Mary began, and then she 
stopped for she saw what the cat was doing. Kitty Casini had 
a mouse She patted it gently with her unarmed paw and 
the naouse squirmed horribly away, dragging its paralysed 
hind legs behind it. The cat let it get nearly to the covert 
of the blackberry vines and then she reached delicately out 
and white thorns had sprouted on her paw. Daintily she 
stabbed the mouse through the back and drew it wriggling 
to her and her tail flicked with tense delight. 

Tom must have been at least half asleep when he heard 
his name called over and over. He jumped up shouting: 
"What is it? Where are you?’ He could hear Mary crying. 
He ran out into the yard and saw what was happening. 



2i8 Cannery Row 

‘Turn your head/ he shouted and he killed the mouse, 
Kitty Casim had leaped to the top of the fence, where she 
watched him angrily Tom picked up a rock and hit her in 
the stomach and knocked her off the fence. 

In the house Mary was still crying a little. She poured the 
water into the teapot and brought it to the table. ‘Sit there/ 
she told Tom and he squatted down on the floor m front of 
the footstool. 

‘Can’t I have a big cup?’ he asked. 

‘I can’t blame Kitty Casini/ said Mary. T know how cats 
are. It isn’t her fault. But — Oh, Tom! I’m going to have 
trouble inviting her again. I’m just not going to like her for 
a while no matter how much I want to ’ She looked closely 
at Tom and saw that the lines were gone from his forehead 
and that he was not blinking badly. £ But then I’m so busy 
with the Bloomer League these days/ she said. T just don’t 
know how I’m going to get everything done,’ 

Mary Talbot gave a pregnancy party that year. And 
everyone said. ‘God! A kid of hers is going to have fun/ 


CHAPTER XXV 

Certainly all of Cannery Row and probably all of Mon- 
terey felt that a change had come. It’s all right not to believe 
in luck and omens. Nobody believes in them. But it dpesn’t 
do any good to take chances with them and no one takes 
chances. Cannery Row, like every other place else, is not 
superstitious, but will not walk under a ladder or open an 
umbrella in the house. Doc was a pure scientist and in- 
capable of superstition and yet when he came m late one 
night and found a line of white flowers across the door-sill 
he had a bad time of it. But most people m Cannery Row 
simply do not believe in such things and then live by 
them. 



Cannery Row 219 

There was no doubt in Mack's mind that a dark cloud 
had hung on the Palace Flophouse. He had analysed the 
abortive party and found that a misfortune had crept into 
every crevice, that bad luck had come up like hives on the 
evening. And once you got into a routine like that the best 
thing to do was just go to bed until it was over You couldn’t 
buck it Not that Mack was superstitious. 

Now a kind of gladness began to penetrate into the Row 
and to spread out from there. Doc was almost supernaturally 
successful with a series of lady visitors. He didn’t half try. 
The puppy at the Palace was growing like a pole bean, and, 
having a thousand generations of training behind her, she 
began to train herself. She got disgusted with wetting on the 
floor and took to going outside. It was obvious that Darling 
was going to grow up a good and charming dog. And she 
had developed no chorea from her distemper 

The benignant influence crept like gas through the Row. 
It got as far as Herman’s hamburger stand, it spread to the 
San Carlos Hotel. Jimmy Brucia felt it and Johnny his sing- 
ing bar- tender. Sparky Evea felt it and joyously joined 
battle with three new out-of-town cops. It even got as far as 
the County Jail in Salinas, where Gay, who had lived a 
good life by letting the sheriff beat him at draughts, sud- 
denly grew cocky and never lost another game. He lost his 
privileges that way, but he felt a whole man again. 

The sea-lions felt it and their barking took on a tone and 
a cadence that would have gladdened the heart of St Francis. 
Little girls studying their catechism suddenly looked up and 
giggled for no reason at all. Perhaps some electrical finder 
could have been developed so delicate that it could have 
located the source of all this spreading joy and fortune. And 
triangulation might possibly have located it in the Palace 
Flophouse and Grill. Certainly the Palace was lousy with It* 
Mack and the boys were charged. Jones was seen to leap 
from his chair only to do a quick tap dance and sit down 



220 


Cannery Row 

again Hazel smiled \aguely at nothing at all The joy was 
so general and so suffused that Mach had a hard time keep- 
ing it centred and aimed at its objective Eddie, who had 
worked at ‘La Ida’ prettv regularly was accumulating a cel- 
lar of some promise He no longer added beer to the waning 
jug It gave a flat taste to the mixture, he said. 

Sam Malloy had planted morning glories to grow* over 
the boiler He had put out a little awning and under it he 
and his wife often sat m the evening. She w*as crocheting a 
bedspread. 

The joy even got into the Bear Flag. Business was good. 
Phyllis Mae’s leg was knitting nicely and she was nearly 
ready to go to work again. Eva Flanegan got back from East 
St Louis very glad to be back. It had been hot in East St 
Louis and it hadn’t been as fine as she remembered it. But 
then she had been younger when she had had so much fun 
there. 

The knowledge or conviction about the party for Doc was 
no sudden thing It did not burst out full blown People 
knew about it, but let it grow gradually, like a pupa in the 
cocoons of their imaginations. 

Mack w r as realistic about it. "Last time we forced her/ he 
told the boys. ‘You can’t never give a good party that way. 
You got to let her creep up on you.’ 

‘Weil, when’s it going to be?’ Jones asked impatiently. 

T don’t know/ said Mack. 

Ts it gonna be a surprise party?’ Hazel asked. 

Tt ought to, that’s the best kind/ said Mack. 

Darling brought him a tennis ball she had found and he 
threw it out the door into the weeds. She bounced away 
after it. 

Hazel said: ‘If we knew when was Doc’s birthday, we 
could give him a birthday-party.’ 

Mack’s mouth was open. Hazel constantly surprised him. 
*By God, Hazel, you got something/ he cried. ‘Yes, sir, if it 



221 


Cannery R*ii 

was Ills birthda) there’d be presents That's just the thing 
All we got to find out is when it is * 

‘That ought to be easy/ said Huglne. "Why don’t we ask 
him ? 9 

‘Hell/ said Mack "Then he’d catch on. You ask a guy 
when is his birthday and especially if \ou\e already give 
him a party like we done, and he’ll know' what you want to 
know for. Ma> be I’ll just go over and smell around a little 
and not let on . 9 

Til go with you/ said Hazel. 

‘No - if two of us went, he might figure we were up to 
something . 9 

‘Well, hell, it was my idear/ said Hazel. 

‘I know/ said Mack. ‘And when it comes off why III tell 
Doc it was your idear. But I think I better go over alone/ 

‘How is he - friendly ? 5 Eddie asked. 

‘Sure, he’s all right/ 

Mack found Doc way back in the downstairs part of the 
laboratory. He was dressed in a long rubber apron and he 
wore rubber gloves to protect his hands from the formalde- 
hyde. He was injecting the veins and arteries of small dog- 
fish with colour mass. His little ball mill rolled over and 
over, mixing the blue mass. The red fluid was already in the 
pressure-gun. Doc’s fine hands worked precisely, slipping 
the needle into place and pressing the compressed-air trig- 
ger that forced the colour into the veins. He laid the finished 
fish in a neat pile. He would have to go over these again to 
put the blue mass in the arteries. The dog-fish made good 
dissection specimens. 

‘Hi, Doc/ said Mack. ‘Keepin 9 pretty busy ? 9 

‘Busy as I want/ said Doc. ‘How’s the pup?’ 

‘Doin’ just fine. She would of died if it hadn’t been for you/ 

For a moment a wave of caution went over Doc and then 
slipped off. Ordinarily a compliment made him wary. He 
had been dealing with Mack for a long time. But the tone 



5222 Cannery Row 

had nothing bnt gratefulness in it. He knew how Mack felt 
about the pup e How are things going up at the Palace?* 

‘Fine, Doc, just fine We got two new chairs. I wish you’d 
come up and see us It’s pretty nice up there now . 5 

‘I will/ said Doc ‘Eddie still bring back the jug?* 

‘Sure , 5 said Mack. ‘He ain’t puttin’ beer in it no more and 
I think the stuff is better. It’s got more zip.’ 

‘It had plenty of zip before,’ said Doc. 

Mack waited patiently Sooner or later Doc was going to 
wade into it and he was waiting. If Doc seemed to open the 
subject himself it would be less suspicious. This was always 
Mack’s method. 

‘Haven’t seen Hazel for some time. He isn’t sick, is he?’ 

‘No,’ said Mack and he opened the campaign. ‘Hazel is 
all right. Him and Hughie are havin’ one hell of a battle. 
Been goin’ on for a week,’ he chuckled. ‘An’ the funny thing 
is it’s about somethin’ they don’t neither of them know 
nothin’ about. I stayed out of it because I don’t know 
nothin’ about it neither, but not them. They’ve even got a 
little mad at each other.’ 

‘What’s it about?’ Doc asked. 

‘Well, sir,’ said Mack, ‘Hazel’s all the time buyin’ these 
here charts and lookin’ up lucky days and stars and stuff like 
that. And Hughie says it’s all a bunch of malarky. Hughie, 
he says if you know when a guy is born you can tell about 
him and Hughie says they’re just sellin’ Hazel them charts 
for two bits apiece Me, I don’t know nothin’ about it. What 
do you think, Doc?’ 

‘I’d kind of side with Hughie,’ said Doc. He stopped the 
ball mill, washed out the colour-gun and filled it with blue 
mass. 

‘They got goin’ hot the other night,’ said Mack. ‘They ask 
me when I’m born so I tell ’em April 12 and Hazel he goes 
and buys one of them charts and read all about me. Well it 
did seem to hit in some places. But it was nearly all good 



Cannery Row 223 

stuff and a guy will believe good stuff about himself. It said 
Pm brave and smart and kind to my friends. But Hazel says 
it’s all true. When’s your birthday* Doc? 5 At the end of the 
long discussion it sounded perfecdy casual. You couldn’t put 
your finger on it. But it must be remembered that Doc had 
known Mack a very long time. If he had not he would have 
said December 1 8, which was his birthday, instead of Octo- 
ber 27, which was not. ‘October 27/ said Doc. ‘Ask Hazel 
what that makes me. 5 

‘It’s probably so much malarky,’ said Mack, ‘but Hazel 
he takes it serious. I’ll ask him to look you up, Doc.* 

When Mack left, Doc wondered casually what the build- 
up was. For he had recognized it as a lead. He knew Mack’s 
technique, his method. He recognized his style. And he 
wondered to what purpose Mack could put the information. 
It was only later, when rumours began to creep in, that Doc 
added the whole thing up. Now he felt slightly relieved, for 
he had expected Mack to put the bite on him. 


CHAPTER XXVI 

The two little boys played in the boat works yard until a 
cat climbed the fence. Instantly they gave chase, drove it 
across the tracks and there filled their pockets with granite 
stones from the roadbed. The cat got away from them in 
the tall weeds, but they kept the stones because they were 
perfect in weight, shape, and size for throwing. You can’t 
ever tell when you’re going to need a stone like that. They 
turned down Cannery Row and whanged a stone at the cor- 
rugated-iron front of Morden’s Cannery. A startled man 
looked out the office window and then rushed for the door, 
but the boys were too quick for him They were lying behind 
a wooden stringer in the lot before he even got near the door* 
He couldn’t have found them in a hundred years. 



224 Cannery Row 

‘I bet he could look all his life and he couldn’t find us/ 
said Joey* 

They got tired of hiding after a while with no one looking 
for them* They got up and strolled on down Cannery Row. 
They looked a long time in Lee’s window, coveting the pliers, 
the hacksaws, the engineers’ caps and the bananas. Then 
they crossed the street and sat down on the lower step of the 
stairs that went to the second storey of the laboratory* 

Joey said: "You know, this guy in here got babies in 
bottles.’ 

‘What kind of babies?’ Willard asked. 

‘Regular babies, only before they’re borned.’ 

‘I don’t believe it,’ said Willard. 

‘Well, it’s true. The Sprague kid seen them and he says 
they ain’t no bigger than this and they got little hands and 
feet and eyes.’ 

‘And hair?’ Willard demanded. 

‘Well, the Sprague kid didn’t say about hair.’ 

‘You should of asked him. I think he’s a liar.’ 

‘You better not let him hear you say that,’ said Joey. 

‘Well, you can tell him I said it. I ain’t afraid of him and 
I ain’t afraid of you. I ain’t afraid of anybody. You want to 
make something of it?’ Joey didn’t answer. ‘Well, do you?’ 

‘No,’ said Joey. ‘I was thinkin’, why don’t we just go up 
and ask the guy if he’s got babies in bottles? Maybe he’d 
show them to us, that is if he’s got any.’ 

‘He ain’t there,’ said Willard. ‘When he’s here, his car’s 
here* He’s away some place. I think it’s a lie. I think the 
Sprague kid is a liar* I think you’re a liar* You want to make 
something of that?’ 

It was a lazy day* Willard was going to have to work hard 
to get up any excitement. ‘I think you’re a coward too* 
You want to make something of that?’ Joey didn’t answer. 
Willard changed his tactics. ‘Where’s your old man now?’ 
he asked in a conversational tone* 



£225 


Cannery Row 

‘He’s dead/ said Joey. 

‘Oh yeah? I didn’t hear. What’d he die of ? 5 

For a moment Joey was silent. He knew Willard knew* 
but he couldn’t let on he knew, not without fighting Willard, 
and Joey was afraid of Willard. 

‘He committed - he killed himself . 5 

‘Yeah ? 5 Willard put on a long face. ‘How’d he do it ? 5 

‘He took rat poison . 5 

Willard’s voice shrieked with laughter. ‘What’d he think 
he was - a rat ? 5 

Joey chuckled a little at the joke, just enough, that is. 

‘He must of thought he was a rat , 5 Willard cried. ‘Did he 
go crawling around like this - look, Joey - like this? Did he 
wrinkle up his nose like this? Did he have a big old long 
tail?’ Willard was helpless with laughter. ‘Why’n’t he just 
get a rat-trap and put his head in it ? 5 They laughed them- 
selves out on that one, Willard really wore it out. Then he 
probed for another joke. ‘What’d he look like when he took 
it — like this ? 5 He crossed his eyes and opened his mouth and 
stuck out his tongue. 

‘He was sick all day , 5 said Joey, ‘He didn’t die ’til the 
middle of the night. It hurt him . 5 

Willard said: ‘What’d he do it for?’ 

‘He couldn’t get a job , 5 said Joey. ‘Nearly a year he 
couldn’t get a job. And you know a funny thing? The next 
morning a guy come around to give him a job * 5 

Willard tried to recapture his joke. ‘I guess he just figured 
he was a rat , 5 he said, but it fell through even for Willard. 

Joey stood up and put his hands in his pockets. He saw 
a little coppery shine in the gutter and walked toward it, 
but just as he reached it Willard shoved him aside and picked 
up the penny. 

‘I saw it first , 5 Joey cried ‘It’s mine.’ 

‘You want to try and make something of it?’ said Willard. 
‘Why’n’t you go and take rat poison ? 5 



Cannery Raw 


CHAPTER XXVII 

Mack and the boys - the Virtues, the Beatitudes, the 
Beauties. They sat in the Palace Flophouse and they were 
the stone dropped in the pool, the impulse which sent out 
ripples to all of Cannery Row and beyond, to Pacific Grove, 
to Monterey, even over the hill to Carmel. 

"This time,* said Mack, "we got to be sure he gets to the 
party. If he don’t get there, we don’t give it.* 

"Where we going to give it this time?’ Jones asked. 

Mack tipped his chair back against the wall and hooked 
his feet around the front legs. T’ve give that a lot of thought/ 
he said. "Of course we could give it here, but it would be 
pretty hard to surprise him here. And Doc likes his own 
place. He’s got his music there.’ Mack scowled around the 
room. "I don’t know who broke his phonograph last time/ 
he said, "But if anybody so much as lays a finger on it next 
time I personally will kick the hell out of him.’ 

"I guess we’ll just have to give it at his place/ said 
Hughie. 

People didn’t get the news of the party - the knowledge 
of it just slowly grew up in them. And no one was invited. 
Everyone was going. October 27 had a mental red circle 
around it. And since it was to be a birthday party there were 
presents to be considered. 

Take the girls at Dora’s. All of them had at one time or 
another gone over to the laboratory for advice or medicine 
or simply for unprofessional company. And they had seen 
Doc’s bed. It was covered with an old faded red blanket full 
of fox tails and burrs and sand, for he took it on all his col- 
lecting trips. If money came in he bought laboratory equip- 
ment. It never occurred to him to buy a new blanket for 
himself. Dora’s girls were making a patchwork quilt, a 
beautiful thing of silk And since most of the silks available 



Cannery Row 227 

came from underclothing and evening dresses, the quilt was 
glorious in strips of flesh pink and orchid and pale-yellow 
and cerise. They worked on it in the late mornings and in 
the afternoons before the boys from the sardine fleet came 
in. Under the community of effort, those fights and ill feel- 
ings that always are present in a whore-house completely 
disappeared. 

Lee Chong got out and inspected a twenty-five-foot string 
of fire-crackers and a big bag of China lily bulbs. These to 
his way of thinking were the finest things you could have 
for a party 

Sam Malloy had long had a theory of antiques. He knew 
that old furniture and glass and crockery, which had not 
been very valuable in its day, had when time went by taken 
on desirability and cash value out of all proportion to its 
beauty or utility. He knew of one chair that had brought 
five hundred dollars. Sam collected pieces of historic auto- 
mobiles and he was convinced that some day his collection, 
after making him very rich, would repose on black velvet 
in the best museums. Sam gave the party a good deal of 
thought and then he went over his treasures, which he kept 
in a big locked box behind the boiler. He decided to give 
Doc one of his finest pieces — the connecting-rod and piston 
from a 1916 Chalmers. He rubbed and polished this beauty 
until it gleamed like a piece of ancient armour. He made a 
little Jdox for it and lined it with black cloth. 

Mack and the boys gave the problem considerable thought 
and came to the conclusion that Doc always wanted cats 
and had some trouble getting them. Mack brought out his 
double cage. They borrowed a female in an interesting con- 
dition and set their trap under the cypress-tree at the top of 
the vacant lot. In the corner of the Palace they built a wire 
cage and in it their collection of angry tom-cats grew every 
night. Jones had to make two trips a day to the canneries 
for fish heads to feed their charges. Mack considered 



228 Cannery Row 

correctly that twenty-five tom-cats would be as nice a 
present as they could give Doc. 

‘No decorations this time, 5 said Mack ‘Just a good solid 
party with lots of liquor 5 

Gay heard about the party clear over m the Salmas jail, 
and he made a deal with the sheriff to get off that night, and 
borrowed two dollars from him for a round-trip bus ticket. 
Gay had been very nice to the sheriff, who wasn’t a man to 
forget it, particularly because election was coming up and 
Gay could, or said he could, swing quite a few votes. Besides, 
Gay could give the Salinas jail a bad name if he wanted to. 

Henri had suddenly decided that the old-fashioned pin- 
cushion was an art form which had flowered and reached its 
peak in the ’Nineties and had since been neglected. He re- 
vived the form and was delighted to see what could be done 
with coloured pins. The picture was never completed — you 
could change it by re-arranging the pins He was preparing 
a group of these pieces for a one-man show when he heard 
about the party, and he finally abandoned his own work 
and began a giant pin-cushion for Doc. It was to be an 
intricate and provocative design in green, yellow, and 
blue pins, all cool colours, and its title was Pre-Cambrian 
Memory. 

Henri’s friend Eric, a learned barber who collected the 
first editions of writers who never had a second edition or 
a second book, decided to give Doc a rowing-machine he 
had got at the bankruptcy proceedings of a client with a 
three-year barber bill. The rowing-machine was in fine 
condition. No one had rowed it much. No one ever uses a 
rowing-machine 

The conspiracy grew and there were endless visits back 
and forth, discussions of presents, of liquor, of what time 
will we start and nobody must tell Doc. 

Doc didn’t know when he first became aware that some- 
thing was going on that concerned him. In Lee Chong’s, 



Cannery Row 229 

conversation stopped when he entered At first it seemed to 
him that people were cold to him. When at least half a 
dozen people asked him what he was doing October 27 he 
was puzzled, for he had forgotten he had given this date as 
his birthday. Actually he had been interested in the horo- 
scope for a spurious birth date, but Mack had never men- 
tioned it again and so Doc forgot it. 

One evening he stopped in at the Halfway House because 
they had a draught beer he liked and kept it at the right 
temperature. He gulped his first glass and then settled down 
to enjoy his second when he heard a drunk talking to the 
bar-tender. ‘You gom’ to the party?" 

‘What party?" 

‘Well," said the drunk confidentially, ‘you know Doc, 
down in Cannery Row." 

The bar-tender looked up the bar and then back. 

‘Well," said the drunk, ‘they "re givm" him a hell of a party 
on his birthday." 

‘Who is?" 

‘Everybody " 

Doc mulled this over. He did not know the drunk at all. 

His reaction to the idea was not simple. He felt a great 
warmth that they should want to give him a party and at 
the same time he quaked inwardly, remembering the last 
one they had given. 

Now everything fell into place - Mack’s question and the 
silences when he was about. He thought of it a lot that 
night sitting beside his desk. He glanced about, considering 
what things would have to be locked up He knew the party 
was going to cost him plenty. 

The next day he began making his own preparations for 
the party. His best records he carried into the back room, 
where they could be locked away. He moved every bit of 
equipment that was breakable back there too He knew how 
it would be — his guests would be hungry and they wouldn’t 



230 Cannery Row 

bring anything to eat. They would run out of liquor early, 
they always did. A little wearily he went up to the Thrift 
Market, where there was a fine and understanding butcher. 
They discussed meat for some time. Doc ordered fifteen 
pounds of steak, ten pounds of tomatoes, twelve heads of 
lettuces, six loaves of bread, a big jar of peanut butter, and 
one of strawberry jam, five gallons of wine and four quarts 
of a good substantial, but not distinguished, whisky. He knew 
he would have trouble at the bank the first of the month. 
Three or four such parties, he thought, and he would lose 
the laboratory. 

Meanwhile, on the Row, the planning reached a cres- 
cendo Doc was right, no one thought of food, but there were 
odd pints and quarts put away all over. The collection of 
presents was growing and the guest list, if there had been 
one, was a little like a census. At the Bear Flag a constant 
discussion went on about what to wear. Since they would 
not be working, the girls did not want to wear the long beau- 
tiful dresses which were their uniforms. They decided to 
wear street clothes. It wasn’t as simple as it sounded. Dora 
insisted that a skeleton crew remain on duty to take care of 
the^regulars. The girls divided up into shifts, some to stay 
until they were relieved by others. They had to flip for who 
would go to the party first. The first ones would see Doc’s 
face when they gave him the beautiful qmlt. They had it on 
a frame in the dining-room and it was nearly finished.- Mrs 
Malloy had put aside her bedspread for a while. She was 
crocheting six doilies for Doc’s beer glasses. The first excite- 
ment was gone from the Row now and its place was taken 
by a deadly cumulative earnestness. There were fifteen tom- 
cats in the cage at the Palace Flophouse and their yowling 
made Darling a little nervous at night. 



Cannery Row 


CHAPTER XXVIII 

SooNERor later Frankie was bound to hear about the party* 
For Frankie drifted about like a small cloud He was always 
on the edge of groups. No one noticed him or paid any 
attention to him. You couldn’t tell whether he was listening 
or not. But Frankie did hear about the party and he heard 
about the presents and a feeling of fullness swelled in him 
and a feeling of sick longing. 

In the window of Jacob’s Jewellery Store was the most 
beautiful thing in the world. It had been there a long time. 
It was a black onyx clock with a gold face, but on top of it 
was the real beauty. On top was a bronze group - St George 
killing the dragon. The dragon was on his back with his 
claws in the air and in his breast was St George’s spear. The 
Saint was in full armour, with the visor raised, and he rode 
a fat, big-buttocked horse. With his spear he pinned the 
dragon to the ground. But the wonderful thing was that he 
wore a pointed beard and he looked a little like Doc. 

Frankie walked to Alvarado Street several times a week 
to stand in front of the window and look at this beauty. He 
dreamed about it too, dreamed of running his fingers over 
the rich, smooth bronze. He had known about it for months 
when he heard of the party and the presents. 

Frankie stood on the pavement for an hour before he 
went inside. ‘Well?’ said Mr Jacobs. He had given Frankie 
a visual searching as he came in and he knew there wasn’t 
seventy-five cents on him. 

‘How much is that?’ Frankie asked huskily. 

‘What?’ 

‘That/ 

‘You mean the clock? Fifty dollars — with the group 
seventy-five dollars/ 

Frankie walked out without replying. He went down to 



232 Cannery Row 

the beach and crawled under an overturned rowboat and 
peeked out at the little waves. The bronze beauty was so 
strong in his head that it seemed to stand out m front of him. 
And a frantic trapped feeling came over him. He had to get 
the beauty. His eyes were fierce when he thought of it. 

He stayed under the boat all day and at night he emerged 
and went back to Alvarado Street. While people went to the 
movies and came out and went to the Golden Poppy, he 
walked up and down the block And he didn’t get tired or 
sleepy, for the beauty burned in him like fire. 

At last the people thinned out and gradually disappeared 
from the streets and the parked cars drove away and the town 
settled to sleep. 

A policeman looked closely at Frankie. ‘What you doing 
out?’ he asked. 

Frankie took to his heels and fled around the corner and 
hid behind a barrel in the alley. At two-thirty he crept to 
the door of Jacob’s and tried the knob. It was locked 
Frankie went back to the alley and sat behind the barrel and 
thought. He saw a broken piece of concrete lying beside the 
barrel and he picked it up. 

The policeman reported that he heard the crash and ran 
to it. Jacob’s window was broken. He saw the prisoner walk- 
ing rapidly away and chased him. He didn’t know how the 
boy could run that far and that fast carrying fifty pounds of 
clock and bronze, but the prisoner nearly got away. If he 
had not blundered into a blind street he would have got 
away. 

The chief called Doc the next day. ‘Come on down, will 
you? I want to talk to you.’ 

They brought Frankie in very dirty and frowzy. His eyes 
were red, but he held his mouth firm and he even smiled a 
little welcome when he saw Doc. 

‘What’s the matter, Frankie?’ Doc asked. 

‘He broke into Jacob’s last night,’ the chief said. ‘Stole 



Cannery Row 233 

some stuff. We got in touch with his mother. She says it’s not 
her fault, because he hangs around your place all the time/ 

‘Frankie — you shouldn’t have done it, 9 said Doc. The 
heavy stone of inevitability was on his heart. ‘Can’t you 
parole him to me?’ Doc asked. 

T don’t think the judge will do it,’ said the chief. ‘We’ve 
got a mental report. You know what’s wrong with him?’ 

‘Yes,’ said Doc. T know.’ 

‘And you know what’s likely to happen when he comes 
into puberty?’ 

‘Yes,’ said Doc, ‘I know,’ and the stone weighed terribly 
on his heart. 

‘The doctor thinks we better put him away. We couldn’t 
before, but now he’s got a felony on him, I think we better/ 

As Frankie listened the welcome died in his eyes. 

‘What did he take?’ Doc asked. 

‘A great big clock and a bronze statue/ 

‘I’ll pay for it/ 

‘Oh, we got it back. I don’t think the judge will hear of it* 
It’ll just happen again. You know that/ 

‘Yes,’ said Doc sofdy, T know. But maybe he had a 
reason. Frankie,’ he said, ‘why did you take it?’ 

Frankie looked a long time at him. ‘I love you/ he said* 

Doc ran out and got in his car and went collecting in the 
caves below Pt Lobos. 


CHAPTER XXIX 

At four o’clock on October 27 Doc finished bottling the last 
of a lot of jelly-fish. He washed out the formaline jug, cleaned 
his forceps, powdered and took off his rubber-gloves. He 
went upstairs, fed the rats, and put some of his best records 
and his microscopes in the back room.. Then he locked it. 
Sometimes an illuminated guest wanted to play with the 



234 Cannery Row 

rattlesnakes. By making careful preparations, by foreseeing 
possibilities, Doc hoped to make this party as non-lethal as 
possible without making it dull. 

He put on a pot of coffee* started the Great Fugue on the 
phonograph, and took a shower. He was very quick about 
it, for he was dressed in clean clothes and was having his cup 
of coffee before the music was completed. 

He looked out through the window at the lot and up at 
the Palace, but no one was moving. Doc didn’t know who 
or how many were coming to his party But he knew he was 
watched. He had been conscious of it all day. Not that he 
had seen anyone, but someone or several people had kept 
him in sight. So it was to be a surprise party. He might as 
well be surprised. He would follow his usual routine, as 
though nothing were happemng. He crossed to Lee Chong’s 
and bought two quarts of beer. There seemed to be a sup- 
pressed Oriental excitement at Lee’s. So they were coming 
too. Doc went back to the laboratory and poured out a glass 
of beer. He drank the first off for thirst and poured a second 
one to taste. The lot and the street were still deserted. 

Mack and the boys were m the Palace and the door was 
closed. All afternoon the stove had roared, heating water 
for baths. Even Darling had been bathed and she wore a 
red bow round her neck. 

‘What time you think we should go over?’ Hazel asked. 

‘I don’t think before eight o’clock,’ said Mack. ‘But I 
don’t see nothin’ against us havin’ a short one to kind of get 
warmed up.’ 

‘How about Doc getting warmed up?’ Hughie said. ‘May- 
be I ought to just take him a bottle like it was just nothing/ 

‘No,’ said Mack. ‘Doc just went over to Lee’s for some 
beer/ 

‘You think he suspects anything?’ Jones asked. 

‘How could he?’ asked Mack. 

In the comer cage two tom-cats started an argument and 



Cannery Row 235 

the whole cageful commented with growls and arched backs* 
There were only twenty-one cats. They had fallen short of 
their mark. 

T wonder how they’ll get them cats over there? 9 Hazel 
began * We can’t carry that big cage through the door. 9 

4 We won’t,’ said Mack. ‘Remember how it was with the 
frogs. No, we’ll just tell Doc about them. He can come over 
and get them ’ Mack got up and opened one of Eddie’s 
wining jugs. ‘We might as well get warmed up,’ he said. 

At five-thirty the old Chinaman flap-flapped down the hill, 
past the Palace. He crossed the lot, crossed the street, and 
disappeared between Western Biological and the Hediondo. 

At the Bear Flag the girls were getting ready. A kind of 
anchor watch had been chosen by straws The ones who 
stayed were to be relieved every hour. 

Dora was splendid. Her hair freshly dyed orange was 
curled and piled on her head. She wore her wedding ring 
and a big diamond brooch on her breast. Her dress was white 
silk, with a black bamboo pattern. In the bedrooms the re- 
verse of ordinary procedure was m practice. 

Those who were staying wore long evening dresses, while 
those who were going had on short print dresses and looked 
very pretty. The quilt, finished and backed, was in a big 
cardboard box in the bar. The bouncer grumbled a little, 
for it had been decided that he couldn’t go to the party. 
Someone had to look after the house. Contrary to orders, 
each girl had a pint hidden and each girl watched for the 
signal to fortify herself a little for the party. 

Dora strode magnificently mto her office and closed the 
door. She unlocked the top drawer of the roll-top desk, took 
out a bottle and a glass and poured herself a snort. And the 
bottle clinked softly on the glass. A girl listening outside the 
door heard the clink and spread the word. Dora would not 
be able to smell breaths now. And the girls rushed for their 
rooms and got out their pints. Dusk had come to Cannery 



236 Cannery Row 

Row, the grey time between daylight and street light* 
Phyllis Mae peeked round the curtain in the front parlour. 

‘Can you see him? 3 Doris asked. 

‘Yeah. He’s got the lights on. He’s sitting there like he’s 
reading. Jesus, how that guy does read. You’d think he’d 
ruin his eyes. He’s got a glass of beer in his hand.’ 

‘Well,’ said Dons, ‘we might as well have a little one, I 
guess.’ 

Phyllis Mae was still limping a little, but she was as good 
as new. She could, she said, lick her weight m City Council- 
men. ‘Seems kind of funny,’ she said. ‘There he is, sitting 
over there and he don’t know what’s going to happen.’ 

‘He never comes in here for a trick,’ Doris said a little 
sadly. 

‘Lots of guys don’t want to pay,’ said PHyllis Mae. ‘Costs 
them more, but they figure it different ’ 

‘Well, hell, maybe he likes them.’ 

‘Likes who?’ 

‘Them girls that go over there.’ 

‘Oh, yeah - maybe he does. I been over there. He never 
made a pass at me.’ 

‘He wouldn’t,’ said Doris. ‘But that don’t mean if you 
didn’t work here you wouldn’t have to fight your way out.’ 

‘You mean he don’t like our profession.’ 

‘No, I don’t mean that at all. He probably figures a girl 
that’s workin’ has got a different attitude.’ 

They had another small snort. 

In her office Dora poured herself one more, swallowed it 
and locked the drawer again. She fixed her perfect hair in 
the wall mirror, inspected her shining red nails, and went 
out to the bar. Alfred the bouncer was sulking. It wasn’t 
anything he said nor was his expression unpleasant, but he 
was sulking just the same. Dora looked him over coldly. I, 
guess you figure you’re getting the blocks, don’t you?’ 

‘No,’ said Alfred. ‘No, it’s quite all right.’ 



Cannery Row 237 

That quite threw Dora. "Quite all right, is it? You got a 
job. Mister. Do you want to keep it or not? 5 

Tt 5 s quite ail right, 5 Alfred said frostily. T ain’t putting 
out no beef 5 He put his elbows on the bar and studied him- 
self m the mirror "You just go and enjoy yourself/ he said. 
T 5 11 take care of everything here. You don 5 t need to worry/ 

Dora melted under his pain. "Look, 5 she said. T don 5 t like 
to have the place without a man. Some lush might get smart 
and the kids couldn’t handle him. But a little later you can 
come over and you could kind of keep your eye on the 
place out of the window. How would that be? You could see 
if anything happened/ 

"Well/ said Alfred, "I would like to come/ He was mol- 
lified by her permission. "Later I might drop over for just a 
minute or two. They was a mean drunk in last night. An 5 
I don’t know, Dora - I kind of lost my nerve since I bust 
that guy’s back. I just ain’t sure of myself no more. I’m gonna 
pull a punch some night and get took.’ 

"You need a rest/ said Dora. ‘Maybe I’ll get Mack to fill 
in and you can take a couple of weeks off/ She was a won- 
derful madam, Dora was. 

Over at the laboratory, Doc had a little whisky after his 
beer. He was feeling a little mellow. It seemed a nice thing 
to him that they would give him a party. He played the 
Pavane to a Dead Princess and felt sentimental and a little sad. 
And because of his feeling he went on with Dapknis and 
Chloe . There was a passage in it that reminded him of some- 
thing else. The observers in Athens before Marathon re- 
ported seeing a great line of dust crossing the Plain, and 
they heard the dash of arms and they heard the Eleusinian 
Chant. There was part of the music that reminded him of 
that picture. 

When it was done he got another whisky and he debated 
in his mind about the Brandenburg . That would snap him out 
of the sweet and sickly mood he was getting into. But what 



238 Cannery Row 

was wrong with the sweet and sickly mood? It was rather 
pleasant. T can play anything I want/ he said aloud. T can 
play Clair de Lune or The Maiden with Flaxen Hair . I’m a free 
man/ 

He poured a whisky and drank it. And he compromised 
with the Moonlight Sonata . He could see the neon light of *La 
Ida’ blinking on and off. And then the street light in front 
of the Bear Flag came on. 

A squadron of huge brown beetles hurled themselves 
against the light and then fell to the ground and moved their 
legs and felt around with their antennae. A lady cat strolled 
lonesomely along the gutter looking for adventure. She won- 
dered what had happened to all the tom-cats who had made 
life interesting and the nights hideous. 

Mr Malloy on his hands and knees peered out of the boiler 
door to see if anyone had gone to the party yet In the 
Palace the boys sat restlessly watching the black hands of 
the alarm clock. 


CHAPTER XXX 

The nature of parties has been imperfectly studied. It is, 
however, generally understood that a party has a pathology, 
that it is a kind of an individual and that it is likely to be a 
very perverse individual. And it is also generally understood 
that a party hardly ever goes the way it is planned or in- 
tended. Tins last, of course, excludes those dismal slave par- 
ties, whipped and controlled and dominated, given by ogre- 
ish professional hostesses. These are not parties at all, but 
acts and demonstrations, about as spontaneous as peristalsis 
and as interesting as its end product. 

Probably everyone in Cannery Row had projected his im- 
agination to how the party would be - the shouts of greet- 
ing, the congratulation, the noise and good feeling. And it 



Cannery Row 239 

didn’t start that way at all Promptly at eight o’clock Mack 
and the boys, combed and clean, picked up their jugs and 
inarched down the chicken-walk, over the railroad track, 
through the lot across the street and up the steps of Western 
Biological. Everyone was embarrassed. Doc held the door 
open and Mack made a little speech. ‘Being as how it’s your 
birthday, I and the boys thought we would wish you happy 
birthday and we got twenty-one cats for you for a present.’ 

He stopped and they stood forlornly on the stairs. 

‘Come on in,’ said Doc. ‘Why -I’m -I’m surprised. I didn’t 
even know you knew it was my birthday.’ 

‘All tom-cats,’ said Hazel ‘We didn’t bring ’em down.* 

They sat down formally in the room at the left. There 
was a long silence ‘Well,’ said Doc, ‘now you’re here, how 
about a little drink? 5 

Mack said: ‘We brought a little snort,’ and he indicated 
the three jugs Eddie had been accumulating. ‘They ain’t no 
beer in it,’ said Eddie. 

Doc covered his early evening reluctance. ‘No,* he said. 
‘You’ve got to have a drink with me. It just happens I laid 
in some whisky ’ 

They were just seated formally, sipping delicately at the 
whisky, when Dora and the girls came in. They presented 
the quilt. Doc laid it over his bed and it was beautiful. And 
they accepted a little drink. Mr and Mrs Malloy followed 
with their presents. 

‘Lots of folks don’t know what this stuff’s going to be 
worth,’ said Sam Malloy as he brought out the Chalmers 
1916 piston and connecting-rod. ‘There probably isn’t three 
of these here left in the world.* 

And now people began to arrive in droves. Henri came 
in with a pin-cushion three by four feet. He wanted to give 
a lecture on his new art form, but by this time the formality 
was broken. Mr and Mrs Gay came in Lee Chong pre- 
sented the great string of fire-crackers and the Ghina lily 



£40 Cannery Row 

bulbs. Someone ate the lily bulbs by eleven o’clock, but the 
fire-crackers lasted longer. A group of comparative strangers 
came in from c La Ida’. The stiffness was going out of the 
party quickly. Dora sat in a kind of throne, her orange hair 
flaming. She held her whisky-glass daintily, with her little 
finger extended And she kept an eye on the girls to see that 
they conducted themselves properly. Doc put dance music 
on the phonograph and he went to the kitchen and began 
to fry the steaks. 

The first fight was not a bad one. One of the group from 
*La Ida’ made an immoral proposal to one of Dora’s girls. 
She protested and Mack and the boys, outraged at this breach 
of propriety, threw him out quickly and without breaking 
anything. They felt good then, for they knew they were con- 
tributing. 

Out in the kitchen Doc was frying steaks in three skillets, 
and he cut up tomatoes and piled up sliced bread. He felt 
very good. Mack was personally taking care of the phono- 
graph. He had found an album of Benny Goodman’s trios. 
Dancing had started, indeed the party was beginning to take 
on depth and vigour. Eddie went into the office and did a 
tap-dance. Doc had taken a pint with him to the kitchen 
and he helped himself from the bottle. He was feeling better 
and better. Everyone was surprised when he served the 
meat. Nobody was really hungry and they cleaned it up in- 
stantly. Now the food set the party into a kind of rich diges- 
tive sadness. The whisky was gone and Doc brought out the 
gallons of wine. 

Dora, sitting enthroned, said: ‘Doc, play some of that 
nice music. I get Christ awful sick of that musical-box over 
home.’ 

Then Doc played Ardo and the Amor from an album of 
Monteverdi. And the guests sat quietly and their eyes were 
inward. Dora breathed beauty. Two newcomers crept up the 
stairs and entered quietly. Doc was feeling a golden pleasant 



Cannery Row 241 

sadness. The guests were silent when the music stopped Doc 
brought out a book and he read in a clear, deep voice; 

Even now 

If I see in my soul the citron-breasted fair one 
Still gold-tinted, her face like our night stars. 

Drawing unto her, her body beaten about with flame. 
Wounded by the flaring spear of love, 

My first of all by reason of her fresh years. 

Then is my heart buried alive in snow. 

Even now 

If my girl with lotus eyes came to me again 
Weary with the dear weight of young love. 

Again I would give her to these starved twins of arms 
And from her mouth drink down the heavy wine. 

As a reeling pirate bee in fluttered ease 
Steals up the honey from the nenuphar. 

Even now 

If I saw her lying all wide eyes 
And with collynum the indent of her cheek 
Lengthened to the bright ear and her pale side 
So suffering the fever of my distance. 

Then would my love for her be ropes of flowers, and night 
A black-haired lover on the breasts of day. 

Even now 

My eyes that hurry to see no more are painting, painting 

faces of my lost girl. O golden rings 

That tap agamst cheeks of small magnolia-leaves, 

O whitest so soft parchment where 
My poor divorced lips have written excellent 
Stanzas of kisses, and will write no more. 

Even now 

Death sends me the flickering of powdery lids 
Over wild eyes and the pity of her slim body 
All broken up with the weariness of joy; 



Cannery Row 

The little red flowers of her breasts to be my comfort 
Moving above scarves, and for my sorrow 
Wet crimson lips that once I marked as mine* 

Even now 

They chatter her weakness through the two bazaars 
Who was so strong to love me. And small men 
That buy and sell for silver being slaves 
Crinkles the fat about their eyes, and yet 
No Prince of the Cities of the Sea has taken her. 

Leading to his grim bed. Little lonely one. 

You cling to me as a garment clings; my girl. 

Even now 

I love long black eyes that caress like silk, 

Ever and ever sad and laughing eyes. 

Whose lids make such sweet shadow when they close 
It seems another beautiful look of hers. 

I love a fresh mouth, ah, a scented mouth. 

And curving hair, subtle as a smoke. 

And light fingers, and laughter of green gems. 

Even now 

I remember that you made answer very softly. 

We being one soul, your hand on my hair. 

The burning memory rounding your near lips, 

I have seen the priestesses of Rati make love at moon fall 
And then in a carpeted hall with a bright gold lamp 
Lie down carelessly anywhere to sleep.* 

Phyllis Mae was openly weeping when he stopped and 
Dora herself dabbed at her eyes. Hazel was so taken by the 
sound of the words that he had not listened to their meaning. 
But a little world sadness had slipped over all of them 
Everyone was remembering a lost love, everyone a call. 

Mack said: ‘Jesus, that’s pretty. Reminds me of a dame... 
and he let it pass. They filled the wineglasses and became 


* Black Mangolds , translated from the Sanskrit by E. Powys Mathers. 



Cannery Row 243 

quiet. The party was slipping away in sweet sadness. Eddie 
went out in the office and did a little tap-dance and came 
back and sat down again. The party was about to recline 
and go to sleep when there was a tramp of feet on the stains* 
A great voice shouted: ‘Where’s the girls?’ 

Mack got up almost happily and crossed quickly to the 
door. And a smile of joy illuminated the faces of Hughie and 
Jones. ‘What girls you got in mind? 5 Mack asked softly. 

‘Ain’t this a whore-house? Cab-driver said they was one 
down here. 5 

‘You made a mistake, Mister. 5 Mack’s voice was gay. 

‘Well, what’s them dames in there?’ 

They joined battle then. They were the crew of a San 
Pedro tuna-boat, good, hard, happy, fight-wise men. With 
the first rush they burst through to the party. Dora’s girls 
had each one slipped off a shoe and held it by the toe. As 
the fight raged by they would clip a man on the head with 
the spike heel. Dora leaped for the kitchen and came roar- 
ing out with a meat grinder. Even Doc was happy. He flailed 
about with the Chalmers 19x6 piston and connecting-rod. 

It was a good fight. Hazel tripped and got kicked in the 
face twice before he could get to his feet again. The Frank- 
lin stove went over with a crash. Driven to a corner the 
newcomers defended themselves with heavy books from the 
bookcases. But gradually they were driven back. The two 
front windows were broken out. Suddenly Alfred, who had 
heard the trouble from across the street, attacked from the 
rear with his favourite weapon, an indoor ball bat. The fight 
raged down the steps and into the street and across into the 
lot. The front door was hanging limply from one hinge 
again. Doc’s shirt was torn off and his slight strong shoulder 
dripped blood from a scratch. The enemy was driven half- 
way up the lot when the sirens sounded. Doc’s birthday 
party had barely time to get inside the laboratory and wedge 
the broken door closed and turn out the lights before the 



244 Cannery Row 

police car cruised up. The cops didn’t find anything. But 
the party was sitting in the dark giggling happily and drink- 
ing wine The shift changed at the Bear Flag The fresh con- 
tingent raged m full of helL And then the party really got 
going. The cops came back, looked m, clicked their tongues 
and joined it. Mack and the boys used the squad car to go 
to Jimmy Brucia’s for more wine and Jimmy came back 
with them You could hear the roar of the party from end 
to end of Cannery Row. The party had all the best quali- 
ties of a riot and a night on the barricades The crew from 
the San Pedro tuna-boat crept humbly back and joined the 
party. They were embraced and admired. A woman five 
blocks away called the police to complain about the noise 
and couldn’t get anyone. The cops reported their own car 
stolen and found it later on the beach. Doc sitting cross- 
legged on the table smiled and tapped his fingers gently on 
his knee. Mack and Phyllis Mae were doing Indian wrest- 
ling on the floor. And the cool bay wind blew in through the 
broken windows. It was then that someone lighted the 
twenty-five-foot string of fire-crackers. 


CHAPTER XXXI 

A well-grown gopher took up residence in a thicket of 
mallow weeds m the vacant lot on Cannery Row. It was a 
perfect place. The deep green luscious mallows towered up 
crisp and rich, and as they matured their little cheeses hung 
down provocatively. The earth was perfect for a gopher- 
hole too, black and soft and yet with a little clay in it so that 
it didn’t crumble and the tunnels didn’t cave in. The gopher 
was fat and sleek and he had always plenty of food in his 
cheek pouches. His little ears were clean and well set and 
his eyes were as black as old-fashioned pin-heads and just 
about the same size. His digging hands were strong and the 



Cannery Row 245 

fur on his back was glossy brown and the fawn-coloured fur 
on his chest was incredibly soft and rich He had long curv- 
ing yellow teeth and a ktde short tail. Altogether he was a 
beautiful gopher and in the prime of his life. 

He came to the place over-land and found it good and he 
began his burrow on a little eminence where he could look 
out among the mallow weeds and see the trucks go by on 
Cannery Row. He could watch the feet of Mack and the 
boys as they crossed the lot to the Palace Flophouse. As he 
dug down into the coal-black earth he found it even more 
perfect, for there were great rocks under the soil. When he 
made his great chamber for the storing of food it was under 
a rock so that it could never cave in, no matter how hard it 
rained It was a place where he could settle down and raise 
any number of families and the burrow could increase in all 
directions. 

It was beautiful in the early morning when he first poked 
his head out of the burrow. The mallows filtered green light 
down on him and the first rays of the rising sun shone into 
his hole and warmed it so that he lay there content and very 
comfortable. 

When he had dug his great chamber and his four emer- 
gency exits and his waterproof deluge room, the gopher be- 
gan to store food. He cut down only the perfect mallow stems 
and trimmed them to the exact length he needed and he 
took them down the hole and stacked them neatly in his 
great chamber, and arranged them so they wouldn’t fer- 
ment or get sour. He had found the perfect place to live* 
There were no gardens about, so no one would think of set- 
ting a trap for him. Cats there were, many of them, but they 
were so bloated with fish-heads and guts from the canneries 
that they had long ago given up hunting. The soil was sandy 
enough, so that water never stood about or filled a hole for 
long. The gopher worked and worked until he had his great 
chamber crammed with food. Then he made little side 



246 Cannery Row 

chambers for the babies who would inhabit them. In a few 
yeans there might be thousands of his progeny spreading out 
from this original hearthstone. 

But as time went on the gopher began to be a little im- 
patient, lor no female appeared. He sat in the entrance of 
his hole in the morning and made penetrating squeaks that 
are inaudible to the human ear but can be heard deep in 
the earth by other gophers. And still no female appeared. 
Finally in a sweat of impatience he went up across the track 
until he found another gopher-hole. He squeaked provoca- 
tively in the entrance. He heard a rustling and smelled 
female, and then out of the hole came an old battle-torn 
bull gopher who mauled and bit him so badly that he crept 
home and lay in his great chamber for three days recovering 
and he lost two toes from one front paw from that fight* 

Again he waited and squeaked beside his beautiful bur- 
row in the beautiful place, but no female ever came, and 
after a while he had to move away. He had to move two 
blocks up the hill to a dahlia garden where they put out 
traps every night. 


CHAPTER XXXII 

Doc awakened very slowly and clumsily like a fat man get- 
ting out of a swimming-pool. His mind broke the surface 
and fell back several times There was red lipstick on his 
beard. He opened one eye, saw the brilliant colours of the 
quilt and closed his eye quickly. But after a while he looked 
again. His eye went past the quilt to the floor, to the broken 
plate in the comer, to the glasses standing on the table 
turned over on the floor, to the spilled wine and the books 
like heavy fallen butterflies. There were little bits of curled 
red paper all over the place and the sharp smell of fire- 
crackers. He could see through the kitchen door to the steak 



Cannery Row 247 

plates stacked high and the skillets deep in grease. Hundreds 
of cigarette-butts were stamped out on the floor. And under 
the fire-cracker smell was a fine combination of wine and 
whisky and perfume. His eye stopped for a moment on a 
little pile of hairpins in the middle of the floor. 

He rolled over slowly and supporting himself on one elbow 
he looked out the broken window. Cannery Row was quiet 
and sunny. The boiler door was open. The door of the Palace 
Flophouse was closed. A man slept peacefully among the 
weeds in the vacant lot. The Bear Flag was shut up tight. 

Doc got up and went into the kitchen and lighted the gas 
water-heater on his way to the toilet. Then he came back 
and sat on the edge of his bed and worked his toes together 
while he surveyed the wreckage. From up the hill he could 
hear the church bells ringing. When the gas heater began 
rumbling he went back to the bathroom and took a shower 
and he put on blue jeans and a flannel shirt. Lee Chong was 
closed, but he saw who was at the door and opened it. He 
went to the refrigerator and brought out a quart of beer 
without being asked. Doc paid him. 

‘Good time? 9 Lee asked His brown eyes were a little in- 
flamed in their pouches. 

‘Good time! 9 said Doc, and he went back to the labora- 
tory with his cold beer. He made a peanut-butter sandwich 
to eat with his beer. It was very quiet in the street. No one 
went by at all Doc heard music in his head — violas and 9 cel- 
los, he thought. And they played cool, soft, soothing music 
with nothing much to distinguish it. He ate his sandwich 
and sipped his beer and listened to the music. When he had 
finished his beer, Doc went into the kitchen, and cleared the 
dirty dishes out of the sink. He ran hot water in it and 
poured soap chips under the running water so that the foam 
stood high and white. Then he moved about collecting all 
the glasses that weren’t broken. He put them in the soapy 
hot water. The steak-plates were piled high on the stove 



248 Cannery Row 

with their brown juice and their white grease sticking them 
together. Doc cleared a place on the table for the clean 
glasses as he washed them. Then he unlocked the door of the 
back room and brought out one of his albums of Gregorian 
music and he put a Paternoster and Agnus Dei on the turn- 
table and started it going. The angelic, disembodied voices 
filled the laboratory. They were incredibly pure and sweet. 
Doc worked carefully washing the glasses so that they would 
not clash together and spoil the music. The boys 5 voices car- 
ried the melody up and down, simply but with the richness 
that is in no other singing. When the record had finished. 
Doc wiped his hands and turned it off. He saw a book lying 
half under his bed and picked it up and he sat down on the 
bed. For a moment he read to himself, but then his lips began 
to move and in a moment he read aloud - slowly, pausing 
at the end of each line. 

Even now 

I mind the coming and talking of wise men from towers 
Where they had thought away their youth. And I, listening. 
Found not the salt of the whispers of my girl. 

Murmur of confused colours, as we lay near sleep; 

Little wise words and little witty words. 

Wanton as water, honied with eagerness. 

In the sink the high white foam cooled and ticked as the 
bubbles burst Under the piers it was very high tide an<f the 
waves splashed on rocks they had not reached m a long time. 

Even now 

I nund that I loved cypress and roses, clear. 

The great blue mountains and the small grey hills. 

The sounding of the sea. Upon a day 
I saw strange eyes and hands like butterflies; 

For me at morning larks flew from the thyme 
And children came to bathe in little streams. 



Cannery Row 249 

Doc closed the book. He could hear the waves beat under 
the piles and he could hear the scampering of white rats 
against the wire. He went into the kitchen and felt the cool- 
ing water in the sink. He ran hot water into it. He spoke 
aloud to the sink and the white rats, and to himself; 

Even now 

I know that I have savoured the hot taste of life 
Lifting green cups and gold at the great feast. 

Just for a small and a forgotten time 
I have had full in my eyes from off my girl 
The whitest pouring of eternal light ... 

He wiped his eyes with the back of his hand. And the 
white rats scampered and scrambled in their cages. And be- 
hind the glass the rattlesnakes lay still and stared into space 
with their dusty, frowning eyes. 





The following pages 
describe other Penguin novels 
and short stories 



AMERICAN FICTION 

* 

Trio (963) 

DOROTHY BAKER 

An American college girl forms a deep and complicated attach- 
ment to a brilliant woman professor. Their relationship is broken 
up by a typical young American (2 s) 

Serenade (902) 

JAMES M. CAIN 

A story of love and a terrible justice* the hero an opera singer, the 
heroine a Mexican prostitute. (2s) 

The Sure Thing (903) 

MERLE MILLER 

A disturbing and convincing account of the witch-hunting of sus- 
pected communists in the United States. (2s) 

The Last Frontier (904.) 

HOWARD FAST 

An account, based on fact, of a group of Cheyenne Indians break- 
ing out from the established Indian Territory and attempting to 
cover the vast distance back to their Wyoming home (2s) 

The Thurber Carnival (871) 

JAMES THURBER 

A collection of the best of the writings and drawings of one of 
America’s greatest humorists. (2s 6d) 

Sanctuary (899) 

WILLIAM FAULKNER 

An impressionist novel of character and violence, poignant and 
logical m method It is the most famous of many books by the 1 949 
winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature (2s) 



SHORT STORIES 

* 

In magazines and periodicals short stories have often reached a 
wider public than that of a good-selling novel Yet, until recently, 
for some strange reason only the best-known writers or the ex- 
ceptionally brilliant have been able to repeat this success m book 
form. Three of these exceptions - three outstanding authors - have 
recently turned their stories into Penguins. Moreover they come 
at a time when readings on the B B.C. and the successful filming of 
Mr Somerset Maugham’s tales have encouraged a new demand 
for this lyrical kind of fiction. The first is Souths a collection of 
‘strange edifices of experience’ (as one critic called them) by 
William Sansom, a young writer who has made an impressive 
reputation m England and America during the last few years. 
Nice and Monte Carlo, Florence and Siena, Naples and Ajaccio 
are the settings of his exotic encounters the characters are gamb- 
lers, sailors, fishermen, urchins, museum guides - and three dogs 
in Siena, 

A volume to contrast with this is Frances Towers’ remarkable 
Tea with Mr Rochester It contains the best stories of an author 
whose early death prevented her from seeing the extraordinary 
success of this, her first published book There are fourteen concise 
and strangely beautiful tales of people In everyday life - men, 
women, and frequently children — and it is her ability to reveal the 
finest perceptions of these characters that make her stones §p un- 
usual. This collection was first published in 1949, when so great 
was the demand for it that a fourth impression had to be issued 
within a few months of publication G W. Stonier, reviewing it in 
The Observer , wrote. ‘Rare indeed are the qualities of intuition and 
expression, of romantic wit, of humorous lift or descent in the 
writing of Frances Towers’. 



The third book in this category returns us to the past, to the 
Golden Age of 4 un-realism 5 Rex Warner has given the whole of 
his second book of Greek Myths to the mam episodes of the ten- 
year struggle between Greeks and Trojans and the poetic legends 
that cluster about the main theme, such as the judgement of Paris, 
Leda and the Swan, the fates of Laocoon and Tantalus The many 
legendary figures include Helen and Achilles, both half-divine, 
she m her beauty and he in his power, Hector tragically human m 
his courage and his family love, mighty Ajax, loyal Patroclus, wise 
Nestor - all of whom were great at a time when wars were small 
and men superhuman, yet who are none the less true for us that 
live in a time of global warfare and little men. As in Rex Warner’s 
earlier collection, Men and Gods (Penguin 885) , some of these myths 
are direct translations and others are new versions of the old stories* 
Most of them have been taken from The Iliad \ 

2s each 


Other collections of short stories now available include * 

Trouble is My Business - Raymond Chandler (741), 2s; Parker Pyne 
Investigates - Agatha Christie (932), 2s, St Mawr and The Virgm 
and the Gipsy - D . H. Lawrence (757) , 2s 6d; The Garden Party - 
Katherine Mansfield (799), 2s, Selected Tales of Algernon Black- 
wood (393), is 6d, The Chronicles of Clovis - Saki (547), is 6d; 
Winesburg Ohio - Sherwood Anderson (609), is 6d, Work Sus- 
pended and Scott-King’s Modem Europe - Evelyn Waugh (824), 
is 6d, Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes - Sir Arthur Conan Doyle (785) 
2s; The Black Girl m Search of God, and lesser tales - Bernard 
Shaw (567), 25 6d, Miss Harriet and other stories -Guy de 
Maupassant (L20), 2s; Trent Intervenes - E . C. Bentley (915), 2s; 
The Innocence of Father Brown - G. K . Chesterton (765), 2s 



BRITISH FICTION 


* 

The Moon and Sixpence (468) 

SOMERSET MAUGHAM 

The story, based on Paul Gauguin's exotic life, of a middle-aged 
stockbroker who abandons his family and business career to de- 
vote himself to painting. (2s) 

Journey Into Spring (909) 

WINSTON CLEWES 

The sensitive story of a man whom the war had made lonely and 
bitter adjusting himself to a difficult village life (2s) 

Loving (958) 

HENRY GREEN 

One of the most famous of Henry Green’s ‘conversation’ novels 
Its characters are the domestic servants of an isolated Irish castle 
during World War II (2s) 

Between the Acts (896) 

VIRGINIA WOOLF 

The author’s last novel. Its action takes place on a summer’s day 
while a local pageant is bemg produced m the village. (2s) 

Six Curtains for Stroganom (959) 

CARYL BRAHMS AND S. J. SIMON 
A hilarious story of the Russian Ballet by the authors of A Bullet in 
the Ballet (2s) 


The Three Hostages (908) 

JOHN BUCHAN 

The author’s most famous hero, Richard Hannay, searches for 
three people kidnapped by a vast criminal combine. (2s) 



In the eaily part of the century Dublin’s Abbey Theatre was 
the shrine of a gieat revival m lush drama The leading figure 
in. that renaissance was J* M Synge, whose six plays now appeal 
m a single Penguin volume* They include that masterpiece of 
comedv, The Playboy of the Western World. , which so enraged its 
fiist-night audience in 1907 that they wrecked the theatre, the 
beautiful \erse drama, Deirdre of the Sorrows , and Riders to the 
Sea 3s) 


Shakespeare and Shaw 

1 w eh e \ olumes of the Penguin Shakespeare are now available — 
Hamlet , King Lear , Macbeth, Henry IV {Part II), Sonnets and A 
Lover's Complaint, The Taming of the Shrew, Antony and Cleopatra, 
Romeo and Juliet , A Midsummer Night's Dream, Love's Labour's 
Lost , Richard III , and Henry V, as are Bernaid Shaw’s Major 
Barbara, Androcles and the Lion, St Joan , The Doctor's Dilemma, 
Pygmalion, Alan and Superman, Plays Pleasant, Plays Unpleasant, 
and Three Plays jor Puritans . 

Four English Tragedies 

EDITED BY J M. MORRELL 

956 

Thebe four plays have been selected to represent the variety m 
poetic tragedy of the kind made familiar by Shakespeaie, and 
they make up a companion volume to the same editor’s Four 
English Comedies (763) The tragedies are Mailowe’s Edward II, 
Webster’s Duchess of Alalfy , Diy den’s All for Love, and Hey- 
wood’s A Woman Killed with Kindness (2s 6d) , the comedies are 
Jonson’s Volpone, Congreve’s Way of the World, Goldsmith’s She 
Stoops to Conquer , and Sheridan’s School for Scandal (3s) 



